---
title: API Reference
meta_description: "Control API provides a REST API to allow you to manage your Ably account. This topic is the Control API Reference guide."
meta_keywords: "Ably, account management, control, REST API, Control API Reference."
section: control-api
index: 30
jump_to:
  Help with:
    - Overview#overview
    - Versioning#versioning
    - See also#see-also
redoc: true
spec_url: "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ably/open-specs/20679e25f631afe11f04beed2661a0f3e279c138/definitions/control-v1.yaml"
---

h2(#overview). Overview

The Control API is a REST API that allows you to manage your Ably account remotely.

The OAS specification for this API can be found in the Ably Open Specs "GitHub repository":https://github.com/ably/open-specs.

h2(#Versioning). Versioning

Each specification contains a version number. If a change is made that is breaking (that is, not backwards compatible) Ably will create a new specification file. For example, Control API version one is in @control-v1.yaml@, but version two would be in @control-v2.yaml@. Currently, only the latest version of the API is rendered here. However, if you want to view a rendering of an older version of the API specification, please visit the Ably Open Specifications "GitHub repository":https://github.com/ably/open-specs for information on how to do this.

h2(#see-also). See also

* "Overview":/control-api
* "Test the API with postman":/control-api/testing-with-postman
* "Curl examples":/control-api/curl-examples
* "Control API Reference":/control-api/api-reference
