---
title: Examples
meta_description: "The Control API is a REST API that enables you to manage your Ably account programmatically."
meta_keywords: "Ably, Control API, account management, control, REST API, OpenAPI Specification, OAS3."
section: control-api
index: 20
jump_to:
  Help with:
    - Examples - Apps#examples-apps
    - Examples - Queues#examples-queues
    - See also#see-also
---

This topic includes some examples of using the Control API with "Curl":https://curl.se/.

In the code examples, you will need to set the following variables by any convenient method (such as setting the variables in a script, or copying and pasting suitable values directly into the code):

|_. Variable |_. Description |
| ACCOUNT_ID | Your Ably Account ID (see "here":/control-api#account-id) |
| ACCESS_TOKEN | Your Ably access token for the Control API (see "here":/control-api#authentication) |
| APP_ID | The application ID for the application you want to modify or retrieve information for (see "here":/control-api#app-id) |

h2(#examples-apps). Applications

You can use the Control API to carry out tasks such as listing and creating applications. Operations available include:

* Get a list of apps
* Create an app
* Update an app
* Delete an app
* Update an app's APNS info 

h3(#examples-apps-list). List your apps

To list all the apps associated with an account:

```[sh]
curl "https://control.ably.net/v1/accounts/${ACCOUNT_ID}/apps" \
     -H "Authorization: Bearer ${ACCESS_TOKEN}" \
     -H "Accept: application/json"
```

Sample response:

```[json]
[
    {
        "accountId": "VgQpOZ",
        "id": "28GY6a",
        "name": "Default",
        "status": "enabled",
        "tlsOnly": true,
        "apnsUseSandboxEndpoint": false,
        "created": 1602844091113,
        "modified": 1602844093051
    },
    ...
]
```

h3(#examples-apps-create). Create an app

To create an app:

```[sh]
curl --location --request POST 'https://control.ably.net/v1/accounts/${ACCOUNT_ID}/apps' \
--header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
--header 'Authorization: Bearer ${ACCESS_TOKEN}' \
--data-raw '{
    "name": "Created App 222",
    "status": "enabled",
    "tlsOnly": true
}'
```

See the "API reference":/control-api/api-reference/#tag/apps/paths/~1accounts~1{account_id}~1apps/post for information on the request body.

Sample response:

```[json]
{
    "accountId": "VgQpOZ",
    "id": "bh4QSw",
    "name": "Created App 222",
    "status": "enabled",
    "tlsOnly": true,
    "apnsUseSandboxEndpoint": false,
    "created": 1625813276973,
    "modified": 1625813276973
}
```

h2(#examples-queues). Queues

You can use the Control API to manage Ably queues. The main operations are:

* List all Ably queues
* Create a queue
* Delete a queue

h3(#examples-queues-list). List queues

To list all queues associated with an app:

```[sh]
curl --location --request GET 'https://control.ably.net/v1/apps/${APP_ID}/queues' \
--header 'Authorization: Bearer ${ACCESS_TOKEN}'
```

Sample response:

```[json]
[
    {
        "id": "28GY6a:us-east-1-a:Test",
        "appId": "28GY6a",
        "name": "Test",
        "region": "us-east-1-a",
        "amqp": {
            "uri": "amqps://us-east-1-a-queue.ably.io:5671/shared",
            "queueName": "28GY6a:Test"
        },
        "stomp": {
            "uri": "stomp://us-east-1-a-queue.ably.io:61614",
            "host": "shared",
            "destination": "/amqp/queue/28GY6a:Test"
        },
        "state": "Running",
        "messages": {
            "ready": 0,
            "unacknowledged": 0,
            "total": 0
        },
        "stats": {
            "publishRate": null,
            "deliveryRate": null,
            "acknowledgementRate": null
        },
        "ttl": 60,
        "maxLength": 10000,
        "deadletter": false,
        "deadletterId": "28GY6a:us-east-1-a:deadletter"
    },
    ...
]
```

h3(#examples-queues-create). Create a queue

To create a queue for an app:

```[sh]
curl --location --request POST 'https://control.ably.net/v1/apps/${APP_ID}/queues' \
--header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
--header 'Authorization: Bearer ${ACCESS_TOKEN}' \
--data-raw '{
    "name": "Queue 123",
    "ttl": 60,
    "maxLength": 10000,
    "region": "eu-west-1-a"
}'
```

See the "API reference":/control-api/api-reference/#tag/queues/paths/~1apps~1{app_id}~1queues/post for information on the request body.

Sample response:

```[json]
{
    "id": "28GY6a:eu-west-1-a:Queue 123",
    "appId": "28GY6a",
    "name": "Queue 123",
    "region": "eu-west-1-a",
    "amqp": {
        "uri": "amqps://eu-west-1-a-queue.ably.io:5671/shared",
        "queueName": "28GY6a:Queue 123"
    },
    "stomp": {
        "uri": "stomp://eu-west-1-a-queue.ably.io:61614",
        "host": "shared",
        "destination": "/amqp/queue/28GY6a:Queue 123"
    },
    "state": "Unknown",
    "messages": {
        "ready": 0,
        "unacknowledged": 0,
        "total": 0
    },
    "stats": {
        "publishRate": null,
        "deliveryRate": null,
        "acknowledgementRate": null
    },
    "ttl": 60,
    "maxLength": 10000,
    "deadletter": false,
    "deadletterId": "28GY6a:eu-west-1-a:deadletter"
}
```

h2(#see-also). See also

* "Control API Reference":/control-api/api-reference
* "Overview":/control-api
* "Test the API with Postman":/control-api/testing-with-postman
