---
title: Overview
meta_description: "Control API provides a REST API to allow you to manage your Ably account."
meta_keywords: "Ably, account management, control, REST API."
section: control-api
index: 0
jump_to:
  Help with:
    - Overview#overview
    - Authentication#authentication
    - Account and application IDs#ids
    - Quickstart#quickstart
    - Rate limits#rate-limits
    - See also#see-also
---

h2(#overview). Overview

The Control API is a REST API that allows you to manage your Ably account remotely.

Using this API you can manage:

* Your applications
* Keys for an application
* Namespaces
* Queues
* Rules

Repetitive operations such as creating or updating apps, enumerating queues, and other tasks can be automated using the Control API.

h2(#authentication). Authentication

In the Ably dashboard, on the top menu bar, navigate to "Free account" (other account name as appropriate) and select "My Access Tokens" from the menu.  

You are presented with the "My Access Tokens" area, where you can create tokens for use with the Control API. 

h3(#create-access-token). Create an access token

To create a new token use the following procedure:

1. Click the "Create new access token" button. 
2. Enter a friendly name for your token, so you'll remember what it's used for.
3. Select the capabilities you wish the token to have, depending on your use case.
4. Click the "Create" button to create the token.

h3(#using-access-token). Using the access token

From the "My access tokens" area you can click the "Copy Token" button, to copy the button to the clipboard.

You use the access token to validate your API requests. This is done by using the access token as a bearer token in the @Authorization@ of the HTTP request. For example, using Curl:

```[sh]
curl -H 'Authorization: Bearer <YOUR_ACCESS_TOKEN>' ...
```

h2(#ids). Account and application IDs

Note that some requests require your Account ID, and some require your App ID.

h3(#account-id). How to find your Account ID

In the Ably dashboard, on the top menu bar, navigate to "Free account" (other account name as appropriate) and select "Account settings". Your Account is displayed.

h3(#app-id). How to find your Application ID

In the Ably dashboard click on the app you want to find the application ID for. Click on the "Settings" tab. The App ID is displayed under "Application settings". It is also the first part of your API key for that application. For example, if your API key is @28AB6c.DEFi0Q@, then the App ID is @28AB6c@.

h2(#quickstart). Quickstart

To list all the apps associated with your account:

```[sh]
curl "https://control.ably.net/v1/accounts/<YOUR_ACCOUNT_ID>/apps" \
     -H 'Authorization: Bearer <YOUR_ACCESS_TOKEN>' \
     -H 'Accept: application/json'
```

h2(#rate-limits). Rate limits

The Control API has certain limits on the number of API calls that can be made per second. The limits are as follows:

|_. Authenticated |_. Limit (requests per hour) |_. Scope |
| True | 4000 | Limit is per account |
| False | 60 | Limit is by IP address |

The limit at the token level is 2000. This prevents an integration from using up all the limits.

If you hit a rate limit you receive an error message, as shown in the following table:

|_. Authenticated |_. HTTP status code |_. Message example |
| True | 429 | Rate limit exceeded; request rejected (nonfatal); metric = channel.maxRate; interval = 2021-05-11:12:43:6; permitted rate = 100; current rate = 100; scope = channel:[app:JrsUEQ:meta]channel.lifecycle |
| False | 401 | Unauthorized |

h2(#see-also). See also

* "Test the API with Postman":/control-api/testing-with-postman
* "Curl examples":/control-api/curl-examples
* "Control API Reference":/control-api/api-reference
