---
title: Occupancy
meta_description: "The occupancy feature returns metrics relating to clients attached to a channel."
---

The occupancy feature returns metrics relating to clients attached to a channel. Occupancy events can be directed to a webhook or other integration, directed to the channel itself, or both.

The inband channel occupancy feature enables a client to subscribe to occupancy events related to a channel. The events are then delivered to that client as messages on the channel. This then enables you to view the number of occupants attached to a channel and specific metrics about their connections.

The metrics returned by the occupancy feature include the number of:

* Clients attached to a channel.
* Clients authorized to subscribe to messages on a channel. 
* Clients authorized to publish to a channel.
* "Presence":/core-features/presence members currently present on a channel.
* Connections authorized to subscribe to presence events.
* Connections authorized to publish presence events.

Query the "channel status API":/rest/channel-status to return the occupancy metrics of a channel. Alternatively, configure a "@channel.occupancy@ rule source":/general/webhooks#sources or subscribe to "inband channel occupancy events":/realtime/inband-occupancy for a channel. 

h2(#occupancy-presence). Occupancy and presence

The occupancy and presence features differ in the following ways:
- Occupancy := provides metrics about the clients attached to a channel. This includes a count of the number of clients attached, the number of publishers and subscribers, the number of presence members, and the number of presence publishers and subscribers.
- Presence := provides information about the activity of members entered into the presence set of a channel. Presence members announce their state to presence subscribers via presence events. For example, when entering the presence set, leaving the presence set, or updating their member data.

The inband channel occupancy feature allows a client to subscribe to occupancy metadata events relating to a single channel, and for those events to be delivered to the client as messages on the channel itself. Occupancy metadata events received as messages on the channel are known as __inband events__.

The @Occupancy@ type is defined in the "Channel Metadata documentation":/api/realtime-sdk/channel-metadata#occupancy.

h2(#integrations). Integrations

Integrations enable data to be sent from Ably channels to external services and for external services to send data to Ably channels.

Data sent from Ably to an external service is in the form of Ably events. Events include messages published to a channel, all types of presence events emitted by a client’s presence status changes, the creation and closure of channels and changes in channel occupancy.

Integrations can be categorized as webhooks or continuous streaming.

Webhook requests are triggered by Ably events to external services such as IFTTT and Zapier or they can invoke functions such as Amazon Lambda. Alternatively, external services can publish data to Ably using incoming webhooks.

Continuous streaming involves data being streamed from Ably into an external streaming or queuing service such as Amazon Kinesis or Amazon SQS.

For more information see the "integrations page":/https://ably.com/docs/general/integrations#title.

h2(#see-also). See also

Please refer to the following resources for more information:

* "Inband channel occupancy tutorial":/tutorials/channel-occupancy-events
* "Channel metadata":/realtime/channel-metadata
* "Metachannels":/realtime/metachannels
* "Channel parameters documentation":/realtime/channel-params
