---
ably_product: reactor
platform: browser
alt_title: Demo alternative title
title: Chat App built with NextJS and Vercel
meta_description: "A chat app built using Ably and Next JS and hosted with Vercel.

This demo shows how to build a basic chat app with Ably which runs in the browser.

Vercel allows users to deploy Serverless Functions, which are essentially just blocks of code which provide a response to an HTTP request. However, these functions have a maximum execution timeout, which means that it is not possible to maintain a WebSocket connection this way. This is where Ably comes in. The client can connect to an Ably Channel and send and receive messages on it to add Realtime functionality to an app by managing the WebSocket connections for you."
meta_keywords: "demo,metadata,keywords,comma,seperated,list"
demo_url: https://next-js-chat-app.vercel.app/
demo_repo: https://github.com/ably-labs/NextJS-chat-app
authors:
- author_bio: ''
  author_image: ''
  author_name: Jo Frank
  author_profile_url: ''
category:
- channels
- reactor-integrations
- push-notifications
- api-hub
date_published: '2022-05-13T09:29:12+01:00'
last_updated: '2022-05-13T13:03:16+00:00'
excerpt: "A chat app built using Ably and Next JS and hosted with Vercel.

This demo shows how to build a basic chat app with Ably which runs in the browser.

Vercel allows users to deploy Serverless Functions, which are essentially just blocks of code which provide a response to an HTTP request. However, these functions have a maximum execution timeout, which means that it is not possible to maintain a WebSocket connection this way. This is where Ably comes in. The client can connect to an Ably Channel and send and receive messages on it to add Realtime functionality to an app by managing the WebSocket connections for you."
group: sdk
index: 120
languages:
- JavaScript
level: none
reading_time: 0
section: Demos
tags:
- Demo
- vercel
- next
- serverless
- websockets
---

h2(#heading). <%= @item[:title] %>

<%= item[:excerpt] %>

* **Demo URL:** "<%= item[:demo_url] %>":<%= item[:demo_url] %>
* **Demo Github:** "<%= item[:demo_repo] %>":<%= item[:demo_repo] %>
