---
ably_product: reactor
platform: browser
title: Live Captioning with Ably and Microsoft Azure Cognitive Services
meta_description: This is a web app that uses Azure Cognitive Service (ACS) and Ably. It is designed to be run in a browser on your mobile phone while you're wearing mask with a flexible LED display. It uses ACS to perform streaming transcription of your microphone input. The data returned from ACS is then sent to the display on the mask via Ably’s MQTT broker. The transcription is also displayed in the browser.
demo_url: https://github.com/ably-labs/live-caption-demo
demo_repo: https://github.com/ably-labs/live-caption-demo
authors:
- Author_name: Jo Franchetti
  author_image: https://ik.imagekit.io/ably/ghost/prod/2020/10/IMG_20180401_163733_mh1522578404669--2-.jpg?tr=w-300
  author_profile_url: https://ably.com/blog/author/jo
category:
- channels
- reactor-integrations
- push-notifications
- api-hub
date_published: '2022-05-13T09:29:12+01:00'
last_updated: '2022-05-13T13:03:16+00:00'
excerpt: This is a web app that uses Azure Cognitive Service (ACS) and Ably. It is designed to be run in a browser on your mobile phone while you're wearing mask with a flexible LED display. It uses ACS to perform streaming transcription of your microphone input. The data returned from ACS is then sent to the display on the mask via Ably’s MQTT broker. The transcription is also displayed in the browser.
group: sdk
index: 120
languages:
- JavaScript
level: none
reading_time: 0
section: tutorials
tags:
- Demo
- livecaption
- wearable
- iot
- mqtt
- azure-cognitive-services
- speech-to-text
---

h2(#heading). <%= @item[:title] %>

<%= item[:excerpt] %>

* **Demo URL:** "<%= item[:demo_url] %>":<%= item[:demo_url] %>
* **Demo Github:** "<%= item[:demo_repo] %>":<%= item[:demo_repo] %>
