---
alt_title: Realtime Peer to Peer Demo with Vue.js
authors:
- author_bio: Developer advocate at Ably
  author_image: ://avatars2.githubusercontent.com/u/3490640?s=460&v=4
  author_name: Jo Franchetti
  author_profile_url: https://github.com/thisisjofrank
category:
- channels
date_published: '2020-06-25T10:03:12+01:00'
excerpt: Learn to build your own peer to peer apps with Ably and Vue.js
group: sdk
index: 106
languages:
- javascript
last_updated: '2021-09-30T16:49:39+01:00'
level: medium
libraries:
- Vue.js
platform: browser
section: tutorials
tags:
- peer to peer
- Pub/Sub
- Multiplayer game
- Vue.js
title: Realtime Peer to Peer Demo with Vue.js
meta_description: "How to build a peer-to-peer demo with Vue.js and Ably."
meta_keywords: "Ably realtime, Vue.js, Ably"
---

In this tutorial we will walk through building a basic Peer to Peer demo in a Static Web App which uses Ably channels. This basic demo can be built upon to make games, chat apps and more, basically any kind of communication where you'd rather not have to configure a central server!

"Ably Channels":/core-features/channels are multicast (many publishers can publish to many subscribers) and we can use them to build peer-to-peer apps.

**"Peer to peer"** (p2p) is a term from distributed computing that describes any system where many participants, often referred to as "nodes", can participate in some form of collective communication. The idea of peer to peer was popularized in early file-sharing networks, where users could connect to each other to exchange files, and search operated across all of the connected users, there is a long history of apps built using p2p. In this demo, we're going to build a simple app that will allow one of the peers to elect themselves the **"leader"**, and co-ordinate communication between each instance of our app.

h3. What's a leader?

Horizontally scaled systems, like p2p, often incorporate some form of "leader election" - where all of the nodes in the system attempt to become the "leader". This "leader" will co-ordinate the work distributed amongst the peers. For the sake of this demo, we will not implement leader election, instead, one of the users is going to click a button that makes them the leader. We'll refer to them as the @host@ throughout this tutorial, although really they are just another peer.

If you want to learn more about robust leader election patterns, "Microsoft have an excellent writeup":https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/architecture/patterns/leader-election.

h2. What are we going to build?

To demonstrate these concepts, we're going to build a simple app that keeps track of users as they join an Ably channel. "You can see and clone the full code for this demo on github":https://github.com/ably/tutorials/tree/tutorial-p2p-vue/p2p-vue-demo.

The @channel name@ will be up to the @host@ to define - by typing it into the UI. There's nothing special about the @host@, they're just the first one to click the @host@ button.

Once a @host@ has joined the @channel@, their browser will be listening for messages from @clients@ joining the same @channel@, and keeping track each time somebody joins.
They'll also keep all the @clients@ in sync, by sending the complete list of @clients@ on every connection.

By the end of this demo, everyone that joins the @channel@, should see the name of every other participant in the browser UI - powered by multicast messages.

h2. A brief introduction to Vue.js before we start

bq. Vue (pronounced /vjuː/, like view) is a progressive framework for building user interfaces. It is designed from the ground up to be incrementally adoptable, and can easily scale between a library and a framework depending on different use cases. It consists of an approachable core library that focuses on the view layer only, and an ecosystem of supporting libraries that helps you tackle complexity in large Single-Page Applications.
<cite>-- "vue.js Github repo":https://github.com/vuejs/vue</cite>

"Vue.js":https://vuejs.org/ is a single page app framework, and we will use it to build the UI of our app. Our Vue code lives in "index.js":https://github.com/ably/tutorials/blob/tutorial-p2p-vue/p2p-vue-demo/index.js - and handles all of the user interactions. We're using Vue because it doesn't require a toolchain and it provides simple binding syntax for updating the UI when data changes.

Our Vue app looks a little like this abridged sample:

```[javascript]
var app = new Vue({
  el: '#app',
  data: {
    greeting: "hello world",
    displayGreeting: true,
  }
  methods: {
    doSomething: async function(evt) { ... }
  }
});
```

It finds an element with the id of @app@ in our markup, and treats any elements within it as markup that can contain @Vue Directives@ - extra attributes to bind data and manipulate our HTML based on the applications state.

Typically, the Vue app makes data available (such as @greeting@ in the above code snippet), and when that data changes, it'll re-render the parts of the UI that are bound to it.
Vue.js exposes a @methods@ property, which we use to implement things like click handlers and callbacks from our UI, like the @doSomething@ function above.

This snippet of HTML should help illustrate how Vue if-statements and directives work

```[html]
<div id="app">
    <div v-if="displayGreeting" v-on:click="doSomething">
        {{ greeting }}
    </div>
</div>
```

Here you'll see Vue's @v-if@ directive, which means that this @div@ and its contents will only display if the @displayGreeting@ @data@ property is true.
You can also see Vue's binding syntax, where we use @{{ greeting }}@ to bind data to the UI.

**Vue is simple to get started with, especially with a small app like this, with easy to understand data-binding syntax.
Vue works well for our example here, because it doesn't require much additional code.**

<%= partial partial_version('tutorials/_setup-free-account') %>

This app will use "Ably Channels":/realtime/channels and "Token Authentication":/auth/token.

h2. Sending consistent messages by wrapping the Ably client

We're going to make a class called @PubSubClient@ which will do a few things for us:

# Allow us to call connect twice to the same channel to make our calling code simpler
# Adds metadata to messages sent outwards, so we don't have to remember to do it in our calling code.

```[javascript]
class PubSubClient {
  constructor(onMessageReceivedCallback) {
    this.connected = false;
    this.onMessageReceivedCallback = onMessageReceivedCallback;
  }
```

We define a constructor for the class and set up some values. These values are a property called @connected@, set to false, and @onMessageReceivedCallback@ - a function passed to the constructor that we will use later when Ably messages arrive.

We're then going to define a @connect@ function

```[javascript]
  async connect(identity, uniqueId) {
    if(this.connected) return;

    this.metadata = { uniqueId: uniqueId, ...identity };

    const ably = new Ably.Realtime.Promise({ authUrl: '/api/createTokenRequest' });
    this.channel = await ably.channels.get(`p2p-sample-${uniqueId}`);

    this.channel.subscribe((message) => {
      this.onMessageReceivedCallback(message.data, this.metadata);
    });

    this.connected = true;
  }
```

While we're making a connection, we're subscribing to an Ably Channel and adding a callback function that passes on the @data@ property from any received message to the function that we pass to the constructor. This data is the JSON that our peers sent, along with some identifying @metadata@ (like the user's @friendlyName@ in this example).

We're also going to define a @sendMessage@ function, which adds some functionality on top of the default Ably @publish()@.

```[javascript]
  sendMessage(message, targetClientId) {
    if (!this.connected) {
      throw "Client is not connected";
    }

    message.metadata = this.metadata;
    message.forClientId = targetClientId ? targetClientId : null;
    this.channel.publish({ name: "myMessageName", data: message});
  }
}
```

Whenever @sendMessage@ is called, we're including the data stored in @this.metadata@ that was set during construction (our clients friendlyName). This ensures that whenever a message is sent **from** a peer, it's always going to include the name of the person that sent it.

We're also making sure that if the message is **for** a specific peer - set using @targetClientId@ - then this property is added to the message before we publish it on the Ably Channel.

We will pass this wrapper to the instances of our @P2PClient@ and @P2PServer@ classes, to make sure they publish messages in a predictable way.

h2. Creating our Vue app

The application is going to be composed of a @Vue@ UI, and two main classes, @P2PClient@ and @P2PServer@.

The @peer@ who elects themselves as host will be the only one to have an instance of @P2PServer@ and all of their @peers@ will be @P2PClients`.

When we define our Vue app, we're going to create two @null@ properties inside of @Vue.data@:

```[javascript]
var app = new Vue({
  el: '#app',
  data: {
    p2pClient: null,
    p2pServer: null,
  ...
```

When a Vue instance is created, it adds all the properties found in its data object to Vue’s **reactivity system**. When the values of those properties change, the view will “react”, updating to match the new values.

By defining both our @p2pClient@ and @p2pServer@ properties inside of Vue's data object, we make them **reactive**, so any changes observed to the properties, will cause the UI to re-render.

Our Vue app only contains two functions, one to start @hosting@ and the other to @join@. In reality, they're both doing the same thing (connecting to an Ably channel by name), but depending on which button is clicked in our UI, that @peer@ will either behave as a host or a client.

```[javascript]
    host: async function(evt) {
      evt.preventDefault();

      const pubSubClient = new PubSubClient((message, metadata) => {
        handleMessagefromAbly(message, metadata, this.p2pClient, this.p2pServer);
      });

      const identity = new Identity(this.friendlyName);
      this.p2pServer = new P2PServer(identity, this.uniqueId, pubSubClient);
      this.p2pClient = new P2PClient(identity, this.uniqueId, pubSubClient);

      await this.p2pServer.connect();
      await this.p2pClient.connect();
    },
```

The @host@ function, creates an instance of the @PubSubClient@, and provides it with a callback to @handleMessageFromAbly@ then:

* Creates a new @Identity@ instance, using the @friendlyName@ bound to our UI
* Creates a new @P2PServer@
* Creates a new @P2PClient@
* Connects to each of them (which in turn, calls @connect@ on our @PubSubClient@ instance)

Joining is very similar:

```[javascript]

    join: async function(evt) {
      evt.preventDefault();

      const pubSubClient = new PubSubClient((message, metadata) => {
        handleMessagefromAbly(message, metadata, this.p2pClient, this.p2pServer);
      });

      const identity = new Identity(this.friendlyName);
      this.p2pClient = new P2PClient(identity, this.uniqueId, pubSubClient);

      await this.p2pClient.connect();
    }
```

Here, we're doing *exactly the same* as the host, except we're only creating a @P2PClient@.

h2. HandleMessageFromAbly

@handleMessageFromAbly@ is the callback function that the @PubSubClient@ will trigger whenever a message appears on the Ably Channel.

```[javascript]
function shouldHandleMessage(message, metadata) {
  return message.forClientId == null || !message.forClientId || (message.forClientId && message.forClientId === metadata.clientId);
}

function handleMessagefromAbly(message, metadata, p2pClient, p2pServer) {
  if (shouldHandleMessage(message, metadata)) {
    p2pServer?.onReceiveMessage(message);
    p2pClient?.onReceiveMessage(message);
  }
}
```

It is responsible for calling any p2pServer @onReceiveMessage@ if the client is a @host@, calling @onReceiveMessage@ on our client. It also makes sure that if a message has been flagged as for a specific client, by including the property @forClientId@, that it doesn't get processed by other peers.

This is deliberately **not secure**. All the messages sent on our Ably channel are multicast, and received by all peers, so it should not be considered tamper proof - but it does prevent us having to filter inside the client and server instances.

h2. P2PClient

The @P2PClient@ class does most of the work in the app.
It is responsible for sending a @connected@ message over the @PubSubClient@ when @connect@ is called, and most importantly of keeping track of a copy of the @serverState@ whenever a message is received.

```[javascript]
class P2PClient {
    constructor(identity, uniqueId, ably) {
      this.identity = identity;
      this.uniqueId = uniqueId;
      this.ably = ably;

      this.serverState = null;
      this.state = { status: "disconnected" };
    }
```

The constructor assigns parameters to instance variables, and initilises a @null@ @this.serverState@ property, along with its own client state in @this.state@.

We then go on to define the @connect@ function

```[javascript]
    async connect() {
      await this.ably.connect(this.identity, this.uniqueId);

      this.ably.sendMessage({ kind: "connected" });
      this.state.status = "awaiting-acknowledgement";
    }
```

This uses the provided @PubSubClient@ (here stored as the property @this.ably@) to send a @connected@ message. The @PubSubClient@ is doing the rest of the work - adding in the @identity@ of the sender during the @sendMessage@ call.

It also sets @this.state.status@ to @awaiting-acknowledgement@ - the default state for all of our client instances until the @P2PServer@ has sent them a @connection-acknowledged@ message.

@OnReceiveMessage@ does a little more work:

```[javascript]
    onReceiveMessage(message) {
      if (message.serverState) {
        this.serverState = message.serverState;
      }

      switch(message.kind) {
        case "connection-acknowledged":
          this.state.status = "acknowledged";
          break;
        default: () => { };
      }
    }
  }
```

There are two things to pay close attention to here - firstly that we update the property @this.serverState@ whenever an incoming message has a property called @serverState@ on it - our clients use this to keep a local copy of whatever the @host@ says its state is, and we'll use this to bind to our UI later.

Then there's our switch on @message.kind@ - the type of message we're receiving.

In this case, we only actually care about the @connection-acknowledged@ message, updating the @this.state.status@ property to @acknowledged@ once we receive one.

h2. P2PServer

Our @P2PServer@ class hardly differs from the client.

It contains a constructor that creates an empty @this.state@ object.

```[javascript]
class P2PServer {
    constructor(identity, uniqueId, ably) {
      this.identity = identity;
      this.uniqueId = uniqueId;
      this.ably = ably;

      this.state = { players: "] };
    }
```

A connect function that connects to Ably via the @PubSubClient@.

```[javascript]
    async connect() {
      await this.ably.connect(this.identity, this.uniqueId);
    }
```

And an @onReceiveMessage@ callback function that responds to the @connected@ message.

```[javascript]
    onReceiveMessage(message) {
      switch(message.kind) {
        case "connected": this.onClientConnected(message); break;
        default: () => { };
      }
    }
```

All of the work is done in @onClientConnected@.

```[javascript]
    onClientConnected(message) {
      this.state.players.push(message.metadata);
      this.ably.sendMessage({ kind: "connection-acknowledged", serverState: this.state }, message.metadata.clientId);
      this.ably.sendMessage({ kind: "peer-status", serverState: this.state });
    }
  }
```

When a client connects, we keep track of their @metadata@ (the @friendlyName@), and then send two messages.
The first, is a @connection-acknowledged@ message, that is sent **specifically** to the @clientId@ that just connected.

Then, it sends a @peer-status@ message, with a copy of the latest @this.state@ object, that will in turn trigger all the clients to update their internal state.

h2. Updating the UI when the internal state of the client updates

We have to write some markup to allow the UI to update when the state changes.

We'll start off with a HTML document and some script tags.

```[html]
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en">
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8">
    <title>P2P Example</title>

    <script src="//cdn.ably.com/lib/ably-1.js" defer></script>
    <script src="//cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/vue/dist/vue.js"></script>

    <script src="/p2p.js" defer></script>
    <script src="/p2p.lib.server.js" defer></script>
    <script src="/p2p.lib.client.js" defer></script>
    <script src="/index.js" defer></script>

    <link rel="stylesheet" href="/style.css" />
  </head>
```

We're including:

* The latest Ably JavaScript SDK
* The Vue library from their CDN
* Our code, split across a few files for organization.
* "p2p.js":https://github.com/ably/tutorials/blob/tutorial-p2p-vue/p2p-vue-demo/p2p.js - contains our @PubSubClient@ and @Identity@ classes
* "p2p.lib.server.js":https://github.com/ably/tutorials/blob/tutorial-p2p-vue/p2p-vue-demo/p2p.lib.server.js - contains our @P2PServer@ class
* "p2p.lib.client.js":https://github.com/ably/tutorials/blob/tutorial-p2p-vue/p2p-vue-demo/p2p.lib.client.js - contains our @P2PClient@ class
* "index.js":https://github.com/ably/tutorials/blob/tutorial-p2p-vue/p2p-vue-demo/index.js - contains our @Vue@ app.

The files are split up with the expectation that the @P2PClient@ and @P2PServer@ code would likely grow over time, with additional messages being introduced and handled.

Now let's fill out the body:

```[html]
  <body>
    <div id="app">
      <h1>P2P Host / Client Example</h1>

      <div class="debug">
        Client State: {{ state?.status == undefined ? "Disconnected" : state?.status }}
      </div>
```

The @Vue@ app is bound to the @div@ with the id @app@ - this means that all the markup inside that @div@ is parsed for @Vue directives@.

Firstly, we're creating a form, to allow users to @host@ or @join@ a session.

```[html]
      <form class="form" v-if="!joinedOrHosting">
        <label for="session-name">Enter a name for your session</label>
        <input type="text" name="session-name" v-model="uniqueId">
        <label for="name-name">Enter your name</label>
        <input type="text" name="name" v-model="friendlyName">

        <button v-on:click="host" class="form-button form-button--host">Host a Session</button>
        <button v-on:click="join" class="form-button">Join a Session</button>
      </form>

```

Most of this is normal HTML, but there are a couple of small details worth paying attention to.
The @v-if@ directive, on the first line can be read as "only display this element, if the following condition is met".

@joinedOrHosting@ is a property defined in our @Vue@ app that looks like this

```[javascript]
  computed: {
    joinedOrHosting: function () { return this.p2pClient != null || this.p2pServer != null; },
  },
```

This @computed@ property can be bound to, and is used to toggle the UI if our user hasn't @joined@ or @hosted@ yet - we've achieved this with a **null check** - because we know that our @this.p2pClient@ and @this.p2pServer@ instances are only created when our @host@ or @join@ functions are called.

Our buttons also have @v-on:click="host"@ attributes in them - this is Vue's onclick handler binding syntax, which wires up our buttons to our Vue app functions. We only have two functions to call, so each of those @v-on:click@ handlers only differ by the word @host@ or @join@.

We then have some markup to render the @game-info@:

```[html]
      <section v-else class="game-info">
        <h2>UniqueId: {{ uniqueId }}</h2>
        <h3>Active players: {{ transmittedServerState?.players?.length }}</h3>
        <ul class="players">
          <li class="player" v-for="user in transmittedServerState?.players">
            <span>{{ user.friendlyName }}</span>
          </li>
        </ul>
      </section>
    </div>
  </body>
</html>
```

Here you'll notice Vue's @template syntax@ - {{ some-property-name }} - by using this syntax, Vue will populate the markup with data sourced from it's data object. We're also using a @v-else@ directive to toggle between the form and this information once a user clicks a button.

The @v-for@ directive on the @li@ element will loop for each element of the @players@ collection, allowing us to output each @user.friendlyName@ using just one line of markup.

This markup, binds to our final Vue app in "index.js":https://github.com/ably/tutorials/blob/tutorial-p2p-vue/p2p-vue-demo/index.js:

```[javascript]
var app = new Vue({
  el: '#app',
  data: {
    p2pClient: null,
    p2pServer: null,

    friendlyName: "Player-" + crypto.getRandomValues(new Uint32Array(1))"0],
    uniqueId: "Session"
  },
  computed: {
    state: function() { return this.p2pClient?.state; },
    transmittedServerState: function() { return this.p2pClient?.serverState; },
    joinedOrHosting: function () { return this.p2pClient != null || this.p2pServer != null; },
  },
  methods: {
    host: async function(evt) { ... },
    join: async function(evt) { ... },
  }
});
```

Referencing both the @data@ object properties, and our extra @computed@ object properties.

h2. Resilience - what happens if a client is disconnected?

The @Ably JavaScript SDK@ can cope with network outages - it'll buffer **outbound** messages when it finds itself in a disconnected state. We're going to illustrate this with a word streaming example.

Firstly, we'll add the following code to the @P2PServer@

```[javascript]
    async sendWordsAcrossMultipleMessages() {
      const phrase = "The quick brown fox jumped over the lazy dog".split(" ");
      const sleep = (ms) => (new Promise(resolve => setTimeout(resolve, ms)));

      for (let word of phrase) {
        this.ably.sendMessage({ kind: "word", word: word, serverState: this.state });
        await sleep(500);
      }
    }
```

"The full code sample has a much longer phrase embedded in it":https://github.com/ably/tutorials/blob/6f31c075fc6db42aeb7dda6128ee889503e79b06/p2p-vue-demo/p2p.lib.server.js#L15

Here, we're taking a phrase, and sending it as a series of messages word-by-word, with a 500ms pause in between each word. We're using @async / await@ to pause our code, just by *resolving a promise* every 500ms.

Now we should update the client to listen for this message. Add a @case@ statement for the @word@ message to its @onReceiveMessage@ handler.

```[javascript]
    onReceiveMessage(message) {
      if (message.serverState) {
        this.serverState = message.serverState;
      }

      switch(message.kind) {
        case "connection-acknowledged":
          this.state.status = "acknowledged";
          break;
        case "word":
          this.state.receivedWords += " " + message.word;
          break;
        default: () => { };
      }
    }
```

When we receive a @word@ message, it is added to a string in our state object. Because of this, we also need to update the @this.state@ object in the @P2PClient@ constructor to start us off with an empty @receivedWords@ property.

```[javascript]
this.state = {
  status: "disconnected",
  receivedWords: ""
  };
```

Next, we're going to make sure to display this in the UI of every attached client by binding the state property into the markup in @index.html@

```[html]
  <section v-else class="game-info">
    <h2>UniqueId: {{ uniqueId }}</h2>
    <button v-if="iAmHost" v-on:click="sendWordsAsHost" class="form-button">Stream words to client</button>

    <h3>Active players: {{ transmittedServerState?.players?.length }}</h3>
    <ul class="players">
      <li class="player" v-for="user in transmittedServerState?.players">
        <span>{{ user.friendlyName }}</span>
      </li>
    </ul>

    <div>
      {{ this.p2pClient.state.receivedWords }}
    </div>
  </section>
</div>
```

We're doing two things here:

1. Adding a @sendWordsAsHost@ onclick to a new @html button@
2. Binding @{{ this.p2pClient.state.receivedWords }}@ - the string of words that the client has seen.

We need to create a function to handle the @Stream words to client@ click, so add a new method to the @Vue methods@ property in @index.js@

```[javascript]
sendWordsAsHost: async function(evt) {
  await this.p2pServer.sendWordsAcrossMultipleMessages();
}
```

This calls the function that added to our @P2PServer@ and the button only displays to the host because of the @v-if@ directive bound to a new @computed property@ @iAmHost@ that verifies that a @p2pserver@ is active.

We'll add @iAmHost@ to the @computed@ property in @index.js@.

```[javascript]
computed: {
  state: function() { ... },
  transmittedServerState: function() { ... },
  joinedOrHosting: function () { ... },
  iAmHost: function() { return this.p2pServer != null; },
}
```

So now, if you start hosting a session, and click @Stream words to client@ you'll see a stream of words appear one by one in your UI.

If your internet connection is disrupted, the Ably client, used by @P2PServer@, will buffer its outbound messages until a connection can be re-established. Ably handles buffered connections in a few different ways (you can find more information in our "realtime connections documentation":/realtime/connection).

bq.. The disconnected state is entered if an established connection is dropped, or if a connection attempt was unsuccessful. In the disconnected state the library will periodically attempt to open a new connection (approximately every 15 seconds), anticipating that the connection will be re-established soon and thus connection and channel continuity will be possible.

In this state, developers can continue to publish messages as they are automatically placed in a local queue, to be sent as soon as a connection is re-established. Messages published by other clients whilst this client is disconnected will be delivered to it upon reconnection, so long as the connection was resumed within 2 minutes.

After 2 minutes have elapsed, recovery is no longer possible and the connection will move to the suspended state.

The suspended state is entered after a failed connection attempt if there has then been no connection for a period of two minutes. In the suspended state, the library will periodically attempt to open a new connection every 30 seconds. Developers are unable to publish messages in this state. A new connection attempt can also be triggered by an explicit call to @connect()@ on the Connection object.

Once the connection has been re-established, channels will be automatically re-attached. The client has been disconnected for too long for them to resume from where they left off, so if it wants to catch up on messages published by other clients while it was disconnected, it needs to use the history API.

p. So much like our @P2PServer@ will buffer outbound messages, any disconnected clients will receive all the messages sent in a window of up to **two minutes of disconnection**.

h3. Using the History API to catch up

Ably offers a @History API@ and a @Rewind@ setting. The History API allows you to query the history of a channel for by default, the last *two minutes* of data. If you enable @persisted history@ on your channel, that window is extended for 24-72 hours (these will count towards your message quotas - "see docs for more on this":https://faqs.ably.com/how-long-are-messages-stored-for). We can use this extended window to allow clients to join "mid-stream" and catch up when they connect.

The "Rewind":https://ably.com/docs/realtime/channels/channel-parameters/overview#supported-parameters parameter can be enabled when you subscribe to a channel, which will immediately then receive up to the last 100 messages in the time window you specify.

The caveat is that the client will be processing historical messages - so be sure you understand what that means for your specific application. In some scenarios, it may be more effective for another @peer@ or the @server@ to just send new clients the state they **need** rather than the client reconstructing it.

To enable Rewind, we need to add the parameter @{ params: { rewind: '1m' } }@ to our @channel.get@ call. This tells our client to return up to the last 100 messages, from the last minute. You can provide different time periods in here in either minutes ('2m') or seconds ('15s').

```[javascript]
async connect(identity, uniqueId) {
  ...
  const ably = new Ably.Realtime.Promise({ authUrl: '/api/createTokenRequest' });
  this.channel = await ably.channels.get(`p2p-sample-${uniqueId}`, { params: { rewind: '1m' } });
  ...
}
```

You will now have a working peer to peer base on which you can build all kinds of apps and games!

h3. But wait, there's more!

This is a self contained demo of building peer to peer apps using @Ably Channels@ as a communication medium.

We'd love to see what exciting apps or games you could build on top of this sort of pattern - and to that end, we made one ourselves!

We made a distributed bingo game called @Ablingo@ on top of this code sample - by adding additional messages, logic, and state to our server. You can read a detailed readme of how we extended this sample at the "repository here":https://github.com/thisisjofrank/Ablingo/.

h2. Running the demo

While this "whole application":https://github.com/ably/tutorials/tree/tutorial-p2p-vue/p2p-vue-demo runs inside a browser, to host it so that other people can use it, you'll need a backend to keep your @Ably API key@ safe. For this demo we're running a version of this app on "Azure Static Web Apps":https://azure.microsoft.com/en-gb/services/app-service/static/. Azure provides a server-less function that we can use to implement "Ably Token Authentication":https://ably.com/docs/realtime/authentication#token-authentication.

We need to keep the @Ably API key@ on the server side, so that people can't grab it and use up your personal quota. The client side SDK can request a temporary key from an API call, we just need somewhere to host it. In the @api@ directory, there's code for an @Azure Functions@ API that implements this @Token Authentication@ behavior.

Azure Static Web Apps automatically hosts this API for us. To have this same experience locally, we'll need to use the "Azure Functions Core Tools":https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/learn/modules/develop-test-deploy-azure-functions-with-core-tools/.

h3. Local dev pre-requirements

We'll use "live-server":https://www.npmjs.com/package/live-server to serve the static files and "Azure functions core tools":https://www.npmjs.com/package/azure-functions-core-tools for interactivity. In your project folder run:

```[sh]
$ npm install -g live-server
$ npm install -g azure-functions-core-tools
```

Than set your API key for local dev:

```[sh]
$ cd api
$ func settings add ABLY_API_KEY Your-Ably-Api-Key
```

Running this command will encrypt your API key into the file @/api/local.settings.json@.
You don't need to check it in to source control, and even if you do, it won't be usable on another machine.

h3. How to run for local dev

To run the app:

```[sh]
$ npx live-server --proxy=/api:http://127.0.0.1:7071/api
```

And run the APIs

```[sh]
$ cd api
$ npm run start
```

h2. Next Steps

* "Vue.js and Node.js tutorial: a realtime collaboration app hosted in Azure Static Web Apps":https://ably.com/blog/tutorial-vuejs-nodejs-azure-static-web-apps
