---
title: Super-lightweight realtime subscriptions with SSE and Ably
excerpt: Learn how to implement subscribe-only capabilities on your clients with SSE
section: tutorials
category: introduction
index: 109
platform: mixed
authors:
- author_name: Samuel Ogundipe
  author_bio: ""
  author_profile_url: https://github.com/samuelayo
  author_image: "/assets/tutorials/samuelayo"
languages:
  - javascript
  - python
level: easy
reading_time: 5
---

h2(#what-is-sse). What is SSE?

Server-Sent Events (SSE) is a standard describing how servers can initiate data transmission towards clients once an initial client connection has been established. They are commonly used to send message updates or continuous data streams to a browser client and are designed to enhance native, cross-browser streaming through a JavaScript API called "EventSource":https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Server-sent_events. Using this API, a client can easily receive an event stream by sending a request to a particular URL endpoint. Basically, using SSE, a client can receive continuous event updates without needing to use any client library SDK or even an adapter like "MQTT":https://www.ably.io/documentation/mqtt.

Ably provides two end-points for HTTP Streaming - @event-stream@ and @SSE@. While the Event Stream endpoint allows your subscriber to receive a stream of events from the server, the SSE endpoint makes sure that the communication conforms to the standard SSE spec, allowing you to use any of the SSE libraries to easily accept and process the stream.

In this tutorial, we'll look at subscribing to real-time updates using both these endpoints. For the purpose of this tutorial, we'll set up a dummy publisher that'll simply publish new time and date for our subscriber clients to receive this data over SSE/ HTTP Streaming.

h2(#setting-up-publisher). Setting up the publisher

The Publisher here refers to the server-side aspect where the messages and events are being published. For the purpose of this tutorial, we will implement a simple example that sends the current date and time as Ably events every two seconds.


blang[javascript].
    Create a simple Node.js file called @publisher.js@ and paste the following code in it, then run this file using the command @node publisher.js@. Don't forget to replace the API key placeholder with your own key.

    ```[nodejs]
    const ably = require('ably').Realtime;
    const moment = require('moment');
    const ablyRealtime = new ably('INSERT-YOUR-API-KEY-HERE')
    const channel = ablyRealtime.channels.get('date-channel');
    const newChannel = ablyRealtime.channels.get('time-channel');
    setInterval(()=> {
      let d = moment();
      channel.publish('event', `Hello, current date is ${d.format('LL')}`)
      newChannel.publish('event', `Hello, current time is ${d.format("hh:mm:ss a")}`)
    }, 2000);
    ```

blang[python].
    Create a simple Python file called @publisher.py@ and paste the following code in it, then run this file using the command @python publisher.py@. Don't forget to replace the API key placeholder with your own key.

    ```[py]
    from ably import AblyRest
    from threading import Timer
    import datetime
    client = AblyRest('INSERT-YOUR-API-KEY-HERE')
    channel = client.channels.get('date-channel')
    newChannel = client.channels.get('time-channel')
    def sendEvent():
        currentDT = datetime.datetime.now()
        channel.publish('event', "Current date is %s" % (currentDT.strftime("%x")))
        newChannel.publish('event', "Current time is %s" % (currentDT.strftime("%X")))
        Timer(2.0, sendEvent).start()
    Timer(2.0, sendEvent).start()
    ```

blang[javascript].
  h2(#setting-up-ui). Setting up the UI

  Let's create a simple HTML file, where we'll implement SSE for subscribing to a stream of data. Create a file called @index.html@ and paste the following HTML code into it:

  ```[html]

  <!DOCTYPE html>
  <html>
    <head>
      <meta charset="utf-8">
          <style>
            ul {
                width: 80%;
                margin-top: 10px;
                margin: 0 auto;
                font-family: courier, courier new;
                background-color: #333;
                height: 300px;
                overflow: scroll;
                color: orange;
            }
            h1{
              text-align: center;
            }
            h3{
              text-align: center;
            }
      </style>
    </head>
    <body>
      <h1>SSE example</h1>

      <h3>Events:</h3>
      <ul id="events"></ul>
    </body>
  </html>
  ```

  In the code above, we create a basic HTML page which consists of an unordered list @ul@ element. The children of this element will be dynamically populated with the real-time event and data updates received from the publisher.

h2(#setting-up-the-subscriber-with-http-event-streaming). Setting up the subscriber

h3(#with-event-streaming). With SSE

blang[javascript].
  Just before the closing @html@ tag, add the following code to the HTML file:

  ```[html]
  <script type="text/javascript">

  const apiKey = "INSERT-YOUR-API-KEY-HERE";

  // can have multiple channels, comma-separated.
  // If a channel name is not url-safe, URL-encode it first
  const channels = "date-channel,time-channel";

  if(apiKey.indexOf("INSERT") === 0) {
    alert("Add your API key to example.html");
    throw 'Cannot proceed without api key';
  }

  const url = `https://realtime.ably.io/sse?v=1.1&key=${apiKey}&channels=${channels}`
  const eventSource = new EventSource(url);
  eventSource.onopen = function() {
    addEvent(`Connected and subscribed to channels: ${channels.split(',').join(', ')}`);
  }

  eventSource.onmessage = function(event) {
    const message = JSON.parse(event.data);
    addEvent(`Channel: ${message.channel} - Message: ${message.name} - ${message.data}`);
  }

  eventSource.onerror = function(error) {
    if(error.data) {
      addEvent(`Error: ${error.data}`);
    } else {
      addEvent('Error connecting to Ably');
    }
  }

  const eventList = document.querySelector('ul#events');

  function addEvent(text) {
    const newElement = document.createElement("li");
    newElement.textContent = text;
    eventList.appendChild(newElement);
  }
  </script>
  ```

  Here, we defined the script section, where we specified the @apiKey@ variable, which should be replaced with your Ably API key. Next, we defined the Ably channel with a variable named channels. We've also added a simple check to see if the API key was in fact replaced. Next, we defined a variable called @url@, which is a template string, feeding in our @apiKey@ and @channels@. Notice that the route of this URL is @/sse@, which means we want to listen to the HTTP event streams from the server.

  We then feed this URL to our @EventSource@, listening for the @onopen@, @onmessage@ and @onerror@ events. Once we get any of these events, we trigger the @addEvent@ function, which appends a new @li@ element to the initial @ul@ element in the HTML markup.

  To see this in action, open your HTML page in your browser. You should get a log of new messages being published by the publisher we earlier set up. Note that in our subscriber, we've not included the Ably SDK but directly subscribed to the data stream.

blang[python].
  Create a new file and call it @subscriber.py@ and paste the following code in it.

  ```[py]
  #pip3 install sseclient-py - install the sseclient
  import json
  import sseclient

  apiKey = 'INSERT_API_KEY_HERE'

  if 'INSERT' in apiKey:
      print("Please replace your API key")
      exit()
  channels = 'date-channel,time-channel'
  url = 'https://realtime.ably.io/sse?v=1.1&key=%s&channels=%s' % (apiKey, channels)

  def with_urllib3(url):
      """Get a streaming response for the given event feed using urllib3."""
      import urllib3
      http = urllib3.PoolManager()
      return http.request('GET', url, preload_content=False)

  response = with_urllib3(url)
  client = sseclient.SSEClient(response)
  for event in client.events():
      message = json.loads(event.data)
      print("Channel: %s  - Message: %s  - %s " % (message['channel'], message['name'], message['data']))
  ```

  Here, we defined the @apiKey@ variable, which should be replaced with your Ably API key. We then defined our Ably "channels":/realtime/channels with a variable named @channels@. We've added a simple check to see if the API key was in fact replaced. Next, we defined a variable called @url@, which is a template string, feeding in our @apiKey@ and @channels@. Notice that the route of this URL is @/sse@, which means we want to listen to the HTTP event streams from the server.
  We then feed this URL to our @with_urllib3@ function, which attempts to fetch the stream, then passing the response to our @sseclient@, listening for the events. Once we get any of these events, we print the details to our console.

  To see this in action, run the python file with the @pythong subscriber.py@ command. You should get a log of new messages being published by the publisher we earlier set up. Note that in our subscriber, we've not included the Ably SDK but directly subscribed to the data stream.


h3(#with-sse). With Event Stream

For the Event Stream endpoint, just replace the URL with @https://realtime.ably.io/event-stream?v=1.1&key=${apiKey}&channels=${channels}@. The rest of the code is exactly the same as that of SSE.

bq. The @/event-stream@ endpoint will give an SSE response if the @Accept@ header is set to @text/event-stream@. The @/sse@ endpoint is provided as an easier way of forcing an SSE response.

h2(#live-demo). Live demo

blang[javascript].
  You can see the full code for this tutorial in the "GitHub repo":https://github.com/ably/tutorials/tree/sse-javascript.

blang[python].
  You can see the full code for this tutorial in the "GitHub repo":https://github.com/ably/tutorials/tree/sse-python.

<iframe src="https://ably-sse-tutorial-demo.glitch.me/" height="400px" width="100%" frameBorder="0" ></iframe>

h2(#conclusion). Conclusion

In this tutorial, we have seen how to subscribe to real-time events using SSE and Ably.
For further readings, you can visit the full "documentation":/sse or checkout a "quick video":https://youtu.be/Z4ni7GsiIbs.


