---
title: Datadog
meta_description: "Connect Ably and Datadog to monitor messages, channels, and connections in realtime, integrating your Ably statistics with your existing Datadog setup."
meta_keywords: "Datadog, integrations, statistics, metrics, monitoring, analytics, enterprise"
---

The Ably "Datadog":https://docs.datadoghq.com/integrations/ably/ integration enables you to monitor your application's statistics. Every 60 seconds, Ably streams a comprehensive set of "statistics":/docs/metadata-stats/stats#metrics to the Datadog API.

h2(#setup). Setup the Datadog integration

To connect Ably with Datadog, you must "request":https://ably.com/support access to the integration. Once granted, you can authorize the integration through Datadog's "OAuth":https://docs.datadoghq.com/developers/integrations/oauth_for_integrations/ flow. This process requires the @api_keys_write@ scope, allowing Ably to push data to your Datadog account.

Once the integration is active, Datadog provides a specific Ably "dashboard":https://docs.datadoghq.com/integrations/ably/, enabling you to monitor key metrics without extra setup.

The following steps setup the Datadog integration:

# In Datadog, go to *Integrations*, find the *Ably* tile, and click *Install Integration*.
# Click *Connect Accounts* to start the authorization process. Datadog redirects you to Ably.
# Log in to your *Ably* account.
# Select your application from the *Your Apps* page.
# Navigate to *Integrations*, and select *Connect to Datadog*.
# Datadog authorization page, authorize Ably using *OAuth* to grant access. The required authorization scope is: @api_keys_write@.
# After completing authorization, you will be redirected to the *Ably dashboard*, and the process is complete.

h2(#remove). Remove access

Removing access disconnects Ably from Datadog, stopping data transmission and revoking authorization. Follow the steps remove the Ably and Datadog integration using either platform.

h3(#in-ably). Remove access using Ably

* Open your application's integration settings.
* Click *Remove* next to the Datadog integration.
* Ably revokes OAuth credentials and stops metric transmission.

h3(#in-datadog). Remove access using Datadog

* Remove associated Ably API keys via *Integrations* or *API Keys*.
* Adjust scopes or entirely revoke OAuth tokens if necessary.

h2(#lite). Datadog lite

Datadog Lite is a lightweight version of the full Datadog integration that sends a reduced set of "statistics":/docs/metadata-stats/stats#metrics to the Datadog API, available for "enterprise":/docs/pricing/enterprise customers. This integration is designed for use cases where full statistics are not required, such as when you only need to monitor a limited number channels or connections.

The following statistics are streamed from Ably to Datadog:

|_. Metric |_. Description |
| @messages.all.messages@ | Total number of messages (excluding presence and state messages). |
| @messages.all.presence@ | Total number of presence messages. |
| @messages.inbound.all.all@ | Total number of inbound messages received by Ably from clients. |
| @messages.outbound.all.all@ | Total number of outbound messages sent from Ably to clients. |
| @connections.all.peak@ | Peak number of simultaneous realtime connections. |
| @channels.peak@ | Peak number of active channels. |
| @push.channelMessages@ | Total number of channel messages that included a push payload. |
| @messages.persisted.messages@ | Total number of persisted messages (excluding presence and state messages). |
| @messages.persisted.presence@ | Total number of persisted presence messages. |


