---
title: Integrations
meta_description: "Integrations enable external services to send data to Ably channels, and for Ably events to send their data to external services."
meta_keywords: "integrations, integration, integrate, stream, external service, webhook, webhooks, functions"
section: general
index: 0
jump_to:
  Help with:
    - Webhooks#webhooks
    - Continuous streaming#streaming
---

Integrations enable data to be sent from Ably channels to external services and for external services to send data to Ably channels.

Data sent from Ably to an external service is in the form of Ably events. "Events":/general/webhooks include "messages":/channels/messages published to a channel, all types of "presence events":/presence-occupancy/presence emitted by a client's presence status changes, the "creation and closure":/channels#attach of channels and changes in "channel occupancy":/presence-occupancy/occupancy.

Integrations can be categorized as "webhooks":#webhooks or "continuous streaming":#streaming. 

Webhook requests are triggered by Ably events to external services such as "IFTTT":https://ifttt.com/ and "Zapier":https://zapier.com/ or they can invoke functions such as "Amazon Lambda":https://aws.amazon.com/lambda/. Alternatively, external services can publish data to Ably using incoming webhooks. 

Continuous streaming involves data being streamed from Ably into an external streaming or queuing service such as "Amazon Kinesis":https://aws.amazon.com/kinesis/ or "Amazon SQS":https://aws.amazon.com/sqs/.

h2(#webhooks). Webhooks

Webhook requests to external services can be triggered by Ably events, or webhook endpoints can be registered within Ably so that an external service can publish data to an Ably channel.

h3. Events via webhooks

Events within Ably can be used to trigger webhook requests to external services. 

"Events":/general/webhooks include "messages":/channels/messages published to a channel, all types of "presence events":/presence-occupancy/presence emitted by a client's presence status changes, the "creation and closure":/channels#attach of channels and changes in "channel occupancy":/presence-occupancy/occupancy.

Events can be used to trigger requests for: 

* "HTTP callbacks":/general/webhooks
* "IFTTT":/general/webhooks/ifttt
* "Zapier":/general/webhooks/zapier

Events can also be used to invoke:

* "Amazon Lambda functions":/general/webhooks/aws-lambda
* "Azure functions":/general/webhooks/azure
* "Cloudflare Workers":/general/webhooks/cloudflare
* "Google Cloud functions":/general/webhooks/google-functions

h3. Incoming webhooks

"Incoming webhooks":/general/incoming-webhooks enable you to publish data from an external web service into an Ably channel by registering a new webhook endpoint in Ably and configuring it within an external service.

h2(#streaming). Continuous streaming

Stream Ably events to an external streaming or queuing service, or use Ably to distribute messages from a service such as Kafka to client devices.

h3. Inbound streaming

Inbound streaming options are where an external service streams data to Ably.

The "Kafka Connector":/general/kafka-connector extends Kafka's streaming capabilities beyond your private network by enabling you to distribute messages to client devices.

h3. Outbound streaming

Outbound streaming options are where Ably events are streamed to an external streaming or queuing service. 

"Events":/general/webhooks include "messages":/channels/messages published to a channel, all types of "presence events":/presence-occupancy/presence emitted by a client's presence status changes, the "creation and closure":/channels#attach of channels and changes in "channel occupancy":/presence-occupancy/occupancy.

The services available to stream to are:

* "AMQP":/general/firehose/amqp-rule
* "Amazon Kinesis":/general/firehose/kinesis-rule
* "Amazon SQS":/general/firehose/sqs-rule
* "Kafka":/general/firehose/kafka-rule
* "Pulsar":/general/firehose/pulsar-rule

