---
title: Ably Kafka Connector
meta_description: "The Ably Kafka Connector enables you to send data from Kafka to an Ably channel."
meta_keywords: "Kafka, Kafka Connector, channel"
section: general
index: 11
languages:
  - none
jump_to:
  Help with:
    - Install the connector#install
    - Configure the connector#configure
    - Tutorials#tutorials
    - See also#see-also
---

Use the Ably Kafka Connector to send data from one or more "Kafka topics":https://developer.confluent.io/learn-kafka/apache-kafka/topics/ into Ably "channels":/realtime/channels.

If you need to send data from Ably to Kafka instead, use a "Kafka rule":/general/firehose/kafka-rule.

h2(#install). Install the connector

The Ably Kafka Connector is available to install from "GitHub":https://github.com/ably/kafka-connect-ably or "Confluent Hub":https://www.confluent.io/hub/ably/kafka-connect-ably.

View detailed instructions for installation on "GitHub":https://github.com/ably/kafka-connect-ably#install.

h2(#configure). Configure the connector

Configure the connector to set "properties":https://github.com/ably/kafka-connect-ably#configuration such as which Kafka topics to send data from, and which Ably channel should receive the data. 

Note that the configuration method will differ depending on whether you are running a single or distributed set of "connect workers":https://docs.confluent.io/home/connect/self-managed/userguide.html#configuring-and-running-workers.

h2(#tutorials). Tutorials

View the "Ably Kafka Connector tutorial":/tutorials/ably-kafka-connector for an example of using the Ably Kafka Connector.

h2(#see-also). See also

* "Firehose overview":/general/firehose
* "Kafka rules":/general/firehose/kafka-rule