@TokenDetails@ is a type providing details of the token string and its associated metadata.

h4.
  default: Properties
  java:    Members
  ruby:    Attributes

- <span lang="default">token</span><span lang="csharp">Token</span> := The token itself. A typical token string may appear like @{{TOKEN}}@<br>__Type: @String@__
- <span lang="default">expires</span><span lang="csharp">Expires</span> := <span lang="default">The time (in milliseconds since the epoch)</span><span lang="ruby,objc,swift">The time</span> at which this token expires<br>__Type: <span lang="default">@Integer@</span><span lang="java">@Long Integer@</span><span lang="csharp">@DateTimeOffset@</span><span lang="ruby">@Time@</span><span lang="objc,swift">@NSDate@</span>__
- <span lang="default">issued</span><span lang="csharp">Issued</span> :=  <span lang="default">The time (in milliseconds since the epoch)</span><span lang="ruby,objc,swift">The time</span> at which this token was issued<br>__Type: <span lang="default">@Integer@</span><span lang="java">@Long Integer@</span><span lang="csharp">@DateTimeOffset@</span><span lang="ruby">@Time@</span><span lang="objc,swift">@NSDate@</span>__
- <span lang="default">capability</span><span lang="csharp">Capability</span> :=  The capability associated with this token. The capability is a a JSON stringified canonicalised representation of the resource paths and associated operations. "Read more about authentication and capabilities":/core-features/authentication/#capabilities-explained<br>__Type: <span lang="default">@String@</span><span lang="csharp">@Capability@</span>__
- <span lang="default">clientId</span><span lang="ruby,python">client_id</span><span lang="csharp">ClientId</span> := The client ID, if any, bound to this token. If a client ID is included, then the token authenticates its bearer as that client ID, and the token may only be used to perform operations on behalf of that client ID. The client is then considered to be an "identified client":/realtime/authentication#identified-clients<br>__Type: @String@__

blang[ruby].
  h3. Methods

  - expired? := True when the token has expired<br>__Type: @Boolean@__

blang[python].
  h3. Methods

  - is_expired() := True when the token has expired<br>__Type: @Boolean@__

blang[csharp].
  h3. Methods

  - IsValidToken() := True if the token has not expired<br>__Type: @Boolean@__
