blang[jsall].
  @ChannelState@ is a String with a value matching any of the "@Realtime Channel@ states":/realtime/channel-messages#channel-states.

  ```[javascript]
    var allChannelStates = [
      'initialized',
      'attaching',
      'attached',
      'detaching',
      'detached',
      'failed'
    ]
  ```

blang[java].
  @io.ably.lib.realtime.ChannelState@ is an enum representing all the "@Realtime Channel@ states":/realtime/channel-messages#channel-states.

  ```[java]
    public enum ChannelState {
      initialized,  // 0
      attaching,    // 1
      attached,     // 2
      detaching,    // 3
      detached,     // 4
      failed        // 5
    }
  ```

blang[csharp].
  @IO.Ably.Realtime.ChannelState@ is an enum representing all the "@Realtime Channel@ states":/realtime/channel-messages#channel-states.

  ```[csharp]
    public enum ChannelState
    {
        Initialized = 0,
        Attaching = 1,
        Attached = 2,
        Detaching= 3,
        Detached = 4,
        Failed = 5
    };
  ```

blang[ruby].
  @Ably::Realtime::Channel::STATE@ is an enum-like value representing all the "@Realtime Channel@ states":/realtime/channel-messages#channel-states. @STATE@ can be represented interchangeably as either symbols or constants.

  h4. Symbol states

  ```[ruby]
    :initialized # => 0
    :attaching # =>   1
    :attached # =>    2
    :detaching # =>   3
    :detached # =>    4
    :failed # =>      5
  ```

  h4. Constant states

  ```[ruby]
    Connection::STATE.Initialized # => 0
    Connection::STATE.Attaching # =>   1
    Connection::STATE.Attached # =>    2
    Connection::STATE.Detaching # =>   3
    Connection::STATE.Detached # =>    4
    Connection::STATE.Failed # =>      5
  ```

  h4. Example usage

  ```[ruby]
    # Example with symbols
    channel.on(:attached) { ... }

    # Example with constants
    channel.on(Ably::Realtime::Channel::STATE.Attached) { ... }

    # Interchangeable
    Ably::Realtime::Channel::STATE.Attached == :attached # => true
  ```

blang[objc,swift].
  @ARTRealtimeChannelState@ is an enum representing all the "@Realtime Channel@ states":/realtime/channel-messages#channel-states.

  ```[objc]
  typedef NS_ENUM(NSUInteger, ARTRealtimeChannelState) {
      ARTRealtimeChannelInitialized,
      ARTRealtimeChannelAttaching,
      ARTRealtimeChannelAttached,
      ARTRealtimeChannelDetaching,
      ARTRealtimeChannelDetached,
      ARTRealtimeChannelFailed
  };
  ```

  ```[swift]
  public enum ARTRealtimeChannelState : UInt {
      case Initialized
      case Attaching
      case Attached
      case Detaching
      case Detached
      case Failed
  }
  ```
