---
title: Consumer
section: api-streamer
index: 68
---

API Streamer has two roles: a Producer and Consumer. A consumer subscribes to streams offered by producers using any of the many open push and pull protocols supported by Ably. A data stream could be anything from live transport updates to a stream of sensor data from an embedded IoT device.

The consumer can subscribe to and manage the data streams provided by one or more data producers. As a Consumer, you can choose which pull protocols (like MQTT or SSE) and which push protocols (like AMQP, Webhooks, Serverless) you would like to use. Furthermore, you can also connect to different stream processing systems such as Kafka, RabbitMQ, Amazon SQS and Kinesis.

h2(#why-ably). Why did my data producer choose to use Ably for streaming data?

Producers choose to expose their realtime APIs through Ably's API Streamer as it makes it easier for both producers and consumers to share realtime data. 

Using API Streamer to consume data streams:

* significantly lowers integration time and engineering cost. You can use the protocols or adapters available to simplify data ingestion.

* allows interoperability for open streaming protocols from SSE, to MQTT, to STOMP.

* allows APIs to be event-driven, capable of pushing data directly into queueing or data processing engines, legacy systems, or even trigger serverless functions in the cloud. For example, Apache Kafka, Amazon Kinesis, or Microsoft Azure.

* offers an end-to-end solution for delivering data to systems or even end-user devices. With current APIs, consumers must process data from producers, store it, and publish it for their end users. API Streamer can enable delivery of data from source to subscriber.

* does away with polling data. Pub/Sub architecture provides high-performance realtime APIs where new updates are pushed directly to you without you having to pull them.

h2(#getting-started-as-a-consumer). Getting started

Our API Streamer Consumer documentation is coming soon... 

If you'd like to get any questions answered before that, "we'll be happy to help":mailto:support@ably.io.

<!-- TODO IMAGE
You have your data - > Publish it into DSN (thus making it available as an api) -> Let your clients use this data or => let other companies use this data by making it available via the API Streamer.
link to tutorial-->