---
title: Overview
section: api-streamer
index: 65
---

h2(#what-is-api-streamer). What is API Streamer?

"API Streamer":https://www.ably.io/api-streamer makes it easy and cost-effective to expose data feeds and create realtime APIs. It combines Ably's Data Stream Network with realtime API management tools to provide the first unified platform for managing the full lifecycle of realtime APIs - from deployment to distribution.

Typically today, data producers provide rate-limited REST APIs for developers to consume data from. But increasingly those APIs are failing to meet developer performance expectations, as polling a REST API offers substandard latencies. So data producers are creating realtime APIs to meet developer demand for realtime data. However, handling some of the issues like interoperability of various realtime protocols and co-existence of push and pull mechanisms of data transfer, at scale, is ridiculously hard to build and maintain.

Creating realtime APIs without a realtime API management platform in place to maintain and manage those APIs leads to an even higher complexity, cost and pressure on the engineering teams to implement these crucial features from scratch. 

This is the gap that API Streamer fills: ready-built API management tools and a distribution network for creators of realtime APIs.

h2(#publishing-data-with-api-streamer). Managing your data streams with Ably's API Streamer

Ably's "Data Stream Network (DSN)":https://www.ably.io/dsn is used to stream data to and from clients over "channels":realtime/channels, which in turn are contained within any number of sandboxed apps created in the "account dashboard":https://support.ably.io/support/solutions/articles/3000030053-how-do-i-access-my-app-dashboard. Using the API Streamer, you can share the same data streams with developer teams at other organizations, with clear and easy to use Realtime API management features such as consolidated stats and analytics, list view of all the consumers of your streams, rate limits, access management, user documentation for each of the data streams, etc.

To use the API Streamer, you'll need an account with Ably. "Sign in":https://www.ably.io/login or "sign up for free":https://www.ably.io/signup now to get started. Every new account comes with new apps - production and sandbox, you can use one of those or create a new one of your own with the required permissions and capbilities.

h2(#api-streamer-elements). Understanding the roles in the API Streamer

With the API Streamer, we support both producers and consumers. Producers deploy, manage and distribute their own realtime data streams with our API Streamer dashboards. Consumers, subscribe to streams offered via the API Streamer, or configure streams to be pushed to them via the Reactor.

h3(#producer). Being a Producer

A producer of data uses API Streamer to share live data streams with subscribers. The API Streamer allows producers to publish their data once to the Ably DSN, and control who has access to their data without worrying about the complexity of which push or pull protocols consumers are using, or indeed how much data is being consumed. Examples of realtime data streams include live sports scores, positioning updates for transport and logistics, or live data streamed from IoT sensors. These data streams can easily be published to the API Streamer via one of your DSN apps, which can then be shared with your "data consumers":#consumer. "Learn more about publishing data streams using the API Streamer":/api-streamer/producer.

h3(#consumer). Being a Consumer

A Consumer is usually invited to API Streamer and granted access to a data stream by a producer. The consumer can subscribe to and manage the data streams provided by one or more data producers. As a Consumer, you can choose which pull protocols (like MQTT or SSE) and which push protocols (like AMQP, Webhooks, Serverless) you would like to use. Furthermore, you can also connect to different stream processing systems such as Kafka, RabbitMQ, Amazon SQS and Kinesis. "Learn more about consuming the data streams using the API Streamer":api-streamer/consumer.

h3(#next-up). Next up

If you'd like to try out the API Streamer, you can read more about "producers":/api-streamer/producer and "consumers":/api-streamer/consumer.

h4(#coming-soon). Coming soon

We are working on step-by-step tutorials and video walk-throughs to help you get started with the API Streamer quickly. Stay tuned!