---
title: Producer
section: api-streamer
index: 67
---

The "Ably API Streamer":https://ably.io/api-streamer makes it easy and cost-effective for organizations and developers to offer realtime APIs, at any scale. It provides a unified solution for publishing, managing and distributing realtime data via open protocol APIs, all built on the "global Ably network":https://www.ably.io/dsn. API Streamer, amongst other things, is being used to share live sports scores and financial market data, mobility IoT data such as GPS locations, and SaaS integration updates in real time.

Much like publishing traditional REST APIs, providing a developer-friendly and scalable realtime API, requires a significant engineering investment. The "Ably API Streamer":https://ably.io/api-streamer helps developers quickly provide realtime APIs without having to build:

* Pull subscription support across open protocols MQTT, SSE, HTTP, etc.
* Push subscription support WebHooks, Kafka, AMQP, serverless functions etc.
* Global cacheing and global low latency delivery
* Developer-friendly portals
* Analytics, reporting and monetization
* Security, access control, rate liming and DoS defenses

h2(#steps). Using the API Streamer

Delivering realtime APIs, regardless of the platform or technology used, requires one to solve three distinct operations: deploy, manage and distribute. In the following sections we cover what is required at a high level for each operation, and how the API Streamer simplifies this.

h3(#deploy). Deploy

Event-driven and realtime data, by it's very nature, needs to flow from the producer to the consumer with the lowest possible latency. Given producers in most cases are decoupled from consumers of data, and not all data that is published is needed by all subscribers, the "publish/subscribe pattern":https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Publish%E2%80%93subscribe_pattern is most commonly used in systems designed to deliver realtime data as streams of events or messages.

<!-- INSERT IMAGE -->

h3(#manage). Manage

Use API Streamer’s realtime native API Management toolkit to maximize the value of your realtime APIs. Streamer’s developer portal gives you security, analytics, stream transformation, as well as monetization and billing tools. Streamer helps turn data streams into revenue streams.

<!-- INSERT IMAGE -->

h3(#distribute). Distribute

API Streamer is designed for ease of publishing, eliminating the need for custom-built integrations. You can simply publish realtime data to the platform with end-to-end delivery guarantees. Whether your data reaches one or a million subscribers, engineering effort is minimal.

<!-- INSERT IMAGE -->

h2(#getting-started-as-a-producer). Getting started

Our API Streamer Producer documentation is coming soon...

If you'd like to get any questions answered before that, "we'll be happy to help":https://www.ably.io/support.

<!-- To understand the end-to-end delivery-ness of the API Streamer, consider the scenario below:
TODO IMAGE
You have your data - > Publish it into DSN (thus making it available as an api) -> Let your clients use this data or => let other companies use this data by making it available via the API Streamer.
Link to tutorial -->
