---
title: Ably API Key
meta_description: "Ably uses an API key for authentication."
---

Every Ably app has one or more API keys assigned to it needed for "authentication":/auth with the Ably endpoints.

h2. Ably API key format

An Ably API key string has the following format: @I2E_JQ.OqUdfg:EVKVTCBlzLBPYJiCZTsIW_pqylJ9WVRB5K9P19Ap1y0@.  

The API key is made up of three parts:

1. @I2E_JQ@ is the public app ID (the part before the first period)
2. @OqUdfg@ is the public app key ID (the part after the period and before the colon). @I2E_JQ.OqUdfg@ is the public API key ID (both the public app ID and app key ID together)
3. @EVKVTCBlzLBPYJiCZTsIW_pqylJ9WVRB5K9P19Ap1y0@ is the API key secret and should never be shared with untrusted parties (the part after the colon)

The API key string that is your private secret and should never be made public. This API key string is used in all of our client libraries and for authentication with the REST API.

h2. Creating an API key

Each API key created in the "Ably dashboard":https://ably.com/dashboard.

You can also create an API key programmatically using the "Control API":/control-api. 

h2. Capabilities

When creating an API key you can specify a set of "capabilities":/auth/capabilities, that control what can be done by the app that uses that key. 

<%= partial partial_version('core-features/_authentication_capabilities') %>

h2. Channel restrictions

Channel restrictions can be configured for an API key to limit the channels it has access to. 

By default an API key has access to all channels, however if channel restrictions such as @general,public:*@ are present then users of this API key will have access to the @general@ channel and all channels within the @public@ "namespace":/general/channel-rules-namespaces.

h2. Issuing tokens

API keys can be used to authenticate with Ably, but can also be used to issue "Ably Tokens":/auth/token#token-process or sign "Ably TokenRequests":/auth/token#token-request-process and "Ably JWTs":/auth/token#ably-jwt-process (JSON Web Tokens). 

Any tokens created only ever have a subset of the permissions, privileges, and channel restrictions for the API key used to create them. This means an issued token never has more privileges than the API key used to issue it.  

Find out more about "Ably authentication":/auth.