---
title: Integrations overview
meta_description: "Integrations enable external services to send data to Ably channels, and for Ably events to send their data to external services."
meta_keywords: "integrations, integration, integrate, stream, external service, webhook, webhooks, functions"
redirect_from:
    - /general/integrations
---

Ably integrations enable you to send your data from Ably to an external service or push data into Ably from an external service. You can trigger actions in your integrated services when events occur in Ably or send data from external systems to Ably.

There are three types of Ably integration:

* "Webhooks":#webhooks
* "Continuous streaming":#streaming
* "Queues":#queues

h2(#webhooks). Webhooks

Integrations can operate either inbound to Ably or outbound from Ably:

h3(#in-web). Inbound to Ably

Use "inbound Webhooks":/integrations/inbound-webhooks to enable external services to send data to Ably — using Ably's infrastructure to deliver messages to connected clients. For example, a sports app can use an inbound webhook from a live scoring service to send game updates to Ably. Ably then delivers these realtime updates to fans via the app, providing instant notifications.

h3(#out-web). Outbound from Ably

Events within Ably — such as messages published to a "channel":/channels, changes in "presence":/presence-occupancy/presence state - can be pushed to external services via webhooks. For example, a fan engagement platform can use Ably to push live game updates to an external application or service, such as score changes or player stats.

Ably offers the following pre-built integrations to support outbound webhooks:

* "AWS Lambda functions":/integrations/outbound-webhooks/aws-lambda
* "Google Cloud functions":/integrations/outbound-webhooks/google-functions
* "Zapier":/integrations/outbound-webhooks/zapier
* "Cloudflare Workers":/integrations/outbound-webhooks/cloudflare
* "IFTTT":/integrations/outbound-webhooks/ifttt

h2(#streaming). Continuous streaming

Continuous streaming is a constant flow of data from Ably to other streaming or queuing infrastructures. This is useful for integrating Ably with large-scale, event-driven architectures or data pipelines.

h3(in-stream). Inbound streaming

Inbound streaming is the continuous transmission of data from another system into Ably. For example, a sports app can stream live game data from an external scoring service into Ably. Ably then distributes this data in realtime to fans through the app, ensuring they stay updated throughout the game.

Ably offers the following pre-built integration to support outbound webhooks:

* "Kafka connector":/integrations/continuous-streaming/kafka-connector

h3(out-stream). Outbound streaming

Outbound streaming continuously forwards events from Ably channels to external streaming or queuing services. For example, a fan engagement platform can use outbound streaming to forward live match updates from Ably channels to an external analytics service.

Ably offers the following pre-built integration to support outbound webhooks:

* "Firehose":/integrations/continuous-streaming/firehose

The Firehose integration includes the following rules:

* "Kafka rule":/integrations/continuous-streaming/kafka-rule
* "Kinesis rule":/integrations/continuous-streaming/kinesis-rule
* "AMQP rule":/integrations/continuous-streaming/amqp-rule
* "SQS rule":/integrations/continuous-streaming/sqs-rule
* "Pulsar rule":/integrations/continuous-streaming/pulsar-rule

h2(#queues). Queues

"Queues":/integrations/queues enable asynchronous communication between a queueing pattern. Producers (Ably channels) publish messages to a queue, and consumers retrieve them in a first-in, first-out order.

While "pub/sub":/channels channels broadcast messages to all subscribers, queues distribute work among consumers. Both patterns serve different use cases. For example, pub/sub is ideal for many users to receive realtime updates, while queues handle tasks like triggering emails efficiently.
