---
title: IFTTT
meta_description: "Ably allows you to trigger IFTTT based on message, channel lifecycle, channel occupancy, and presence events."
meta_keywords: "IFTTT, integrations, events, serverless"
languages:
  - none
redirect_from:
  - /general/events/ifttt
  - /general/webhooks/ifttt
---

As part of "Webhooks":/integrations/webhooks, it is possible to integrate with various systems via webhooks.

"IFTTT":https://ifttt.com allows for simple conditional chains, helping to combine various services together. Ably can integrate into IFTTT through their "webhooks":https://ifttt.com/maker_webhooks functionality.

h2(#fields). Rule fields

- IFTTT Webhook key := Your IFTTT account's unique webhook key. This is obtained from going to their "Webhooks page":https://ifttt.com/maker_webhooks, then going to @Documentation@
- Event name := The Event name is used to identify the IFTTT applet that receives the event, make sure you write the same name when creating the IFTTT applet
- Headers := Optional headers to send along with any message
- Source := Choose which of @channel.message@, @channel.presence@, @channel.lifecycle@, or @channel.occupancy@ events on channels should activate this event rule.
- "Channel filter":/integrations/webhooks#channel-filter := An optional filter on channel name, to restrict the channels the rule applies to. Use a regular expression to match multiple channels.
- Encoding := The encoding to be used by this rule. This can only be @JSON@ for IFTTT due to the "restrictions":#restrictions detailed below

h2(#restrictions). Restrictions

IFTTT has limitations on the data it can process. All payloads are expected to be @JSON@, with keys of @value1@, @value2@, or @value3@. A payload of anything besides @JSON@, or any key:values beyond these cannot be processed.

Due to this, we do not support "enveloping":/integrations/webhooks#envelope, "batching":/integrations/webhooks#batching, or MsgPack encoding for IFTTT. In addition, any communication which requires decoding on the other end, such as messages sent via "MQTT":/protocols/mqtt will not be able to pass data on to IFTTT.

In addition, if you are wanting data to be passed through and processed by IFTTT, you will need to ensure relevant data matches the above structure. For example, the data of a message or presence message sent through IFTTT should conform to the following structure:

```[json]
{
  "value1" :"data I want to send 1",
  "value2" :"data I want to send 2",
  "value3" :"data I want to send 3"
}
```

In the future we would like provide transformation capabilities, allowing for data sent on "channels":/channels to be re-structured prior to being sent to an endpoint. For IFTTT, this would allow for channel communication to not need to adhere to the IFTTT data structure expectations. If this would be of interest to you, please "get in touch":https://ably.com/contact.

h2(#example). Example

For a "message data":/api/realtime-sdk/messages#data or "presence message data":/api/realtime-sdk/presence#presence-message of @{ "value1": "My first message", "value2": "My second message"}@, the following would be sent to your IFTTT endpoint:

*Headers*:

```[text]
host: https://maker.ifttt.com/trigger/{YOUR_EVENT}/with/key/{YOUR_IFTTT_KEY}
content-type: application/json
x-ably-envelope-appid: {YOUR_APP_ID}
x-ably-envelope-channel: {YOUR_CHANNEL}
x-ably-envelope-rule-id: {YOUR_RULE_ID}
x-ably-envelope-site: {ably-server-location}
x-ably-envelope-source: channel.message
x-ably-message-encoding: json
x-ably-message-id: {UNIQUE_ABLY_MESSAGE_ID}
x-ably-message-timestamp: {TIMESTAMP_ORIGINAL_MESSAGE_WAS_SENT}
x-ably-version: 1.2
content-length: 18
connection: keep-alive
```

*Payload*:

```[json]
{
  "value1": "My first message",
  "value2": "My second message"
}
```
