---
title: AWS Lambda Functions
meta_description: "Ably allows you to trigger AWS Lambda functions based on message, channel lifecycle, channel occupancy, and presence events."
meta_keywords: "AWS Lambda, integrations, events, serverless"
languages:
  - none
redirect_from:
  - /docs/general/events/aws-lambda
  - /docs/general/webhooks/aws-lambda
---

"AWS Lambda Functions":https://aws.amazon.com/lambda/ provide event-driven serverless compute functions. Lambda Functions let you run code automatically whenever events are sent to them, making it easy to integrate with other AWS services.

h2(#trigger). Trigger AWS Lambda functions

To trigger an AWS Lambda function in response to Ably "channel":/docs/metadata-stats/metadata/subscribe#channel-lifecycle events:

* Go to your Ably "dashboard":https://ably.com/dashboard/any and select your app.
* Navigate to the *Integrations* tab.
* Click *New Integration Rule*.
* In the *Select your rule type* section, choose *webhook*.
* Under *Select service integration*, click *AWS Lambda*.
* Fill in the required *AWS Region* and your *Function Name* (must match the name of your function in AWS).
* Choose an *Authentication* scheme:
** Select either *AWS Credentials* and provide a key:value pair.
** Or use *ARN of an assumable role* if you're using IAM role-based authentication.
* (Optional) Enter a *Qualifier* if you're using a version or alias of your Lambda function.
* In the "*Source*":/docs/integrations/webhooks#sources dropdown, select the type of events that will trigger the rule:
** Message
** Presence
** Channel Lifecycle
** Channel Occupancy
* (Optional) Add a "*Channel Filter*":/docs/integrations/webhooks#channel-filter using a regular expression to target specific channels. Leave empty to apply to all channels.
* Choose an "*Encoding*":/docs/integrations/webhooks#encoding format:
** JSON
** MsgPack
* Choose if you want messages to be "*Enveloped:*":/docs/integrations/webhooks#enveloped
** Enabled by default. If unchecked, the raw payload will be sent without additional metadata.
* Click *Create* to finish setting up the rule.

h2(#auth). AWS authentication

Create an "IAM role":https://docs.aws.amazon.com/IAM/latest/UserGuide/id_roles.html that the Ably AWS account can assume to delegate access to your AWS resources. This approach follows AWS best practices, as it avoids sharing access keys directly. Specify the role’s ARN to grant Ably the necessary permissions in a secure manner.

h3(#lambada). Create Lambda policy

The following steps show you how to create a policy for AWS Lambda:

* In the IAM console sidebar select *Policies*.
* Click *Create Policy*.
* Click the JSON tab and enter the following JSON to configure the policy:

```[json]
{
    "Version": "2012-10-17",
    "Statement": [
        {
            "Sid": "AllowInvokeLambdaFunction",
            "Effect": "Allow",
            "Action": [
                "lambda:InvokeAsync",
                "lambda:InvokeFunction"
            ],
            "Resource": [
                "arn:aws:lambda:<YOUR_AWS_REGION>:<YOUR_AWS_ACCOUNT>:function:<YOUR_FUNCTION_NAME>"
            ]
        }
    ]
}
```

<aside data-type='note'>
<p>You will need to replace @<YOUR_AWS_REGION>@, @<YOUR_AWS_ACCOUNT>@, and @<YOUR_FUNCTION_NAME>@ with the AWS region that hosts your AWS Lambda function, your AWS account ID, and your AWS Lambda function name respectively.</p>
</aside>

* Click *Next: Tags*. You don't need to add any tags.
* Click *Next: Review*.
* Enter a suitable name for your policy.
* Click *Create Policy*.

h3(#role). Create a role

Create an IAM role as follows:

* In the AWS IAM console, click *Roles* in the sidebar and then click *Create Role*.
* For type of trusted entity select *Another AWS account*.
* For Account ID specify 203461409171. This is the Ably AWS account.
* Click the *Require external ID checkbox* and then enter an "external ID":/docs/ids-and-keys/ of @<Your_Ably_Account_ID>.<Your_Ably_app_ID>@. This is also displayed when you create an Ably AWS Lambda, AWS Kinesis, or AWS SQS integration rule and select the *ARN of an assumable role* radio button in the create rule dialog.
* Click *Next: Permissions*.
* Now select the policy you created earlier to attach to this role. You can type the name of your policy into the *Filter policies* search box.

Then ensure the checkbox for the policy is selected.

* Click *Next: Tags*.
* You don't need to add tags so click *Next: Review*.
* Enter a suitable name for your role.
* Click *Create Role*.


h3(#setup). Set up ARN

When setting up an Ably integration rule, you can copy the ARN for your rule by clicking the provided button Then, enter the copied ARN into the *Assume Role ARN* text field in the rule creation section.

You can test your Ably rule by clicking *Test rule* in the "dashboard":https://ably.com/dashboard/any. If the test returns a success message, your AWS permissions are correctly configured.
