---
title: Zapier
meta_description: "Ably allows you to trigger Zapier based on message, channel lifecycle, channel occupancy, and presence events."
meta_keywords: "Zapier, integrations, events, serverless"
languages:
  - none
redirect_from:
  - /docs/general/events/zapier
  - /docs/content//webhooks/zapier
  - /docs/general/webhooks/zapier
---

"Zapier":https://zapier.com/page/webhooks enables integration with thousands of services using their webhooks feature.

To trigger a Zap in Zapier using Ably channel events:

* Go to your Ably "dashboard":https://ably.com/dashboard/any and select your app.
* Navigate to the *Integrations* tab.
* Click *New Integration Rule*.
* In the *Select your rule type* section, choose *webhook*.
* Under *Select service integration*, click *Zapier*.
* Click *Open Zapier webhooks template* to create a webhook Zap in Zapier.
* Copy the webhook URL from Zapier and paste it into the *URL* field.
* (Optional) Add custom *Headers* as key:value pairs if additional information needs to be sent.
** Click *Another header* to add more headers.
* Choose the *Request Mode*:
** *Single Request* - Sends each event separately.
** *Batch Request* - Sends requests in batches (1 second interval, with a max number of messages per envelope).
* In the "*Source*":/docs/integrations/webhooks#sources dropdown, choose the type of Ably events that should trigger the rule:
** Message
** Presence
** Channel Lifecycle
** Channel Occupancy
* (Optional) Add a "*Channel Filter*":/docs/integrations/webhooks#channel-filter using a regular expression to limit the rule to specific channels. Leave empty to apply to all channels.
* Choose an "*Encoding*":/docs/integrations/webhooks#encoding format:
** JSON - Simple text-based format.
** MsgPack - Not available for this rule type.
* Decide if messages should be "*Enveloped:*":/docs/integrations/webhooks#enveloped
** Enabled by default. If unchecked, the raw payload will be sent without metadata.
* Click *Create* to finish setting up the rule.
