---
title: Enterprise package
meta_description: "Explore the features of Ably's Enterprise package."
---

Custom packages to meet all of your business needs.

h2(#features). Features

Enterprise packages can include features such as:

- HIPAA BAA := Ably is "HIPAA compliant":https://faqs.ably.com/are-you-hipaa-compliant and can sign a Business Associate Agreement (BAA) in most cases.
- Regional data constraints := require that all traffic is routed and serviced only within specific regions, such as EU-only, or US-only.
- Custom CNAMEs := use your own custom domain, or a subdomain of Ably for your application or service.
- SAML and SCIM := authenticate with Ably using your own Identity Provider (IdP) and automatically provision users within your Ably account.
- Active traffic management := Ably can monitor the health of your own endpoints and proactively take steps to isolate, or move, traffic to ensure business continuity.
- DataDog := send metrics from Ably into your DataDog account.
- PrivateLink := enable traffic from your users and servers into Ably without using the public internet via "AWS PrivateLink":https://aws.amazon.com/privatelink/.
- Private clusters := guaranteed capacity and isolation from all other Ably users.

h2(#pricing). Pricing

"Contact us":https://ably.com/contact?cta=enterprise_package to discuss setting up an Enterprise package that best suits your needs.

<aside data-type='note'>
<p>If you're an existing customer with a current contract then contact your Customer Success Manager to discuss any details regarding your package.</p>
</aside>

h2(#limits). Limits

Enterprise packages are made for "limitless scale":/pricing/limits.

h2(#support). Support

Enterprise packages include enhanced Service Level Agreements (SLAs) to ensure that Ably is ready to support you.
