---
title: Free package
meta_description: "Explore the features of Ably's Free package."
---

The Free package is intended for developers to try out Ably. They can freely experiment with its features and build a proof of concept. No credit card is required to sign up and there's no time limit on how long you can try it for.

h2(#features). Features

The Free package includes the following units of consumption:

|_. Limit |_. Free |
| Message rate (per second) | 500 |
| Messages (per month) | 6,000,000 |
| Concurrent channels | 200 |
| Concurrent connections | 200 |

Free package users also have access to the following features:

* Google and GitHub SSO

h2(#pricing). Pricing

There is no cost associated with the Free package, and you don't need to provide a credit card in order to use the service.

h2(#limits). Limits

"Compare the limits":/docs/pricing/limits associated with each package to see those available on the Free package.

h2(#support). Support

Free package support includes Ably's best effort Service Level Objective (SLO) and access to community support, including "Discord":https://discord.gg/g8yqePUVDn and "Stack Overflow":https://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/ably-realtime.

h2(#upgrade). Upgrade from Free to Standard or Pro

To upgrade your account from a Free package to a Standard or Pro package:

1. Ensure you are the "account owner":/docs/account/users.
2. Log in to your "account":https://ably.com/login and select *Billing* from the *Account* menu.
3. Choose the plan you wish to upgrade to and follow the instructions. Upgrades take effect immediately.

Note that your first invoice will be issued at the start of the following calendar month. It covers consumption from the point of upgrade up until the end of that month. All subsequent invoices will follow the same pattern of billing for the previous month's consumption. The base package price will be charged pro-rata from the point in the month that you upgraded.

Once you upgrade to a "Standard":/docs/pricing/standard or "Pro":/docs/pricing/pro package, your consumption is counted from that point onwards. For example, if you upgrade in the middle of the month, you are charged for the first message you send after upgrading, not after the 6,000,000 messages allowed on the Free package.

h2(#free-enterprise). Upgrade from Free to Enterprise

To upgrade your account from a Free package to an "Enterprise package":/docs/pricing/enterprise, "contact us":https://ably.com/contact?cta=enterprise_package to discuss your options.

h2(#downgrade). Downgrade

To downgrade your account to a Free package:

1. Ensure you are the "account owner":/docs/account/users.
2. Log in to your "account":https://ably.com/login and select *Billing* from the *Account* menu.
3. Click the *Downgrade* button.

If you downgrade from a Standard or Pro package, you will finish the month on the Standard package with its associated limits and benefits. At the beginning of the following month you will receive a final invoice covering your last month's consumption. Once the final invoice has been paid, your payment details are removed from the system.

<aside data-type='note'>
<p>Be aware that this will permanently delete all the information associated with your account.</p>
</aside>

h2(#close). Close your account

You can close your account at any time by first "downgrading":#downgrade to the "Free package":/docs/pricing/free. The following steps outline the the process to close your account:

* Ensure you are the account "owner":/docs/account/users#roles.
* Downgrade all paid "packages":/docs/pricing#packages free packages:
** Navigate to *Account* then *Billing*.
** Click *Save billing details* to save your changes.
* After all packages have been downgraded to *Free*, go to the *My Settings* page.
** Navigate to *Want to delete your profile?*.
** Click *start* to begin the closure process.
* On the *Close Your Ably Account* page:
** Review the account summary, including ownership, plan type, and app details.
** Confirm all accounts are on the *Free* tier and details are accurate.
** Click *Confirm Closure* to permanently deactivate your Ably account.

If you sign in with SSO, for example, Google or GitHub, you cannot use the self-service account closure process. To proceed, you must set a password and disconnect their SSO provider via My Settings.

* Log in to your Ably account using your current SSO method (Google or GitHub).
* Navigate to *Account* then *My Settings*.
* In the *Password* section, click *Change your password*.
* Click *Update my personal settings* to save the changes.
* Scroll to the *Login provider* section.
* Click *remove connection* next to the SSO provider/s you want to disconnect.

<aside data-type='note'>
<p>Closing your account will permanently delete all associated data and cannot be undone.</p>
</aside>


