---
title: Pro package
meta_description: "Explore the features and cost of Ably's Pro package."
---

The Pro package is for when your business is growing and you need higher limits to accommodate this.

h2(#features). Features

The Pro package includes the following limits on the key units of consumption:

|_. Limit |_. Pro |
| Message rate (per second) | 10,000 |
| Messages (per month) | Unlimited |
| Concurrent channels | 50,000 |
| Concurrent connections | 50,000 |

Pro package users also have access to the following features:

* Google and GitHub SSO
* DataDog Lite

h2(#pricing). Pricing and billing

The Pro package has a monthly fee of $399 plus the number of messages, and channel and connection minutes that you use on top of that. You will be billed for the previous month's consumption.

Note that volume discounts reset every month.

h2(#limits ). Limits

"Compare the limits":/docs/pricing/limits associated with each package to see those available on the Pro package.

h2(#support). Support

Standard package support includes access to Ably support via email with a Service Level Agreement (SLA) of less than 1 business day for general guidance and less than 2 business hours for system impediments or system down.

h2(#free-pro). Upgrade from Free to Pro

To upgrade your account from a Free package to a Pro package:

1. Ensure you are the "account owner":/docs/account/users.
2. Log in to your "account":https://ably.com/login and select *Billing* from the *Account* menu.
3. Choose the plan you wish to upgrade to and follow the instructions. Upgrades take effect immediately.

Note that your first invoice will be issued at the start of the following calendar month. It covers consumption from the point of upgrade up until the end of that month. All subsequent invoices will follow the same pattern of billing for the previous month's consumption. The base package price will be charged pro-rata from the point in the month that you upgraded.

Once you upgrade to a Pro, your consumption is counted from that point onwards. For example, if you upgrade in the middle of the month, you are charged for the first message you send after upgrading, not after the 6,000,000 messages allowed on the Free package.

h2(#standard-pro). Upgrade from Standard to Pro

To upgrade your account from a Standard package to a Pro package:

1. Ensure you are the "account owner":/docs/account/users.
2. Log in to your "account":https://ably.com/login and select *Billing* from the *Account* menu.
3. Choose the plan you wish to upgrade to and follow the instructions. Upgrades take effect immediately.

The base package price will be charged pro-rata from the point in the month that you upgraded. This is true for the current Standard package base price, as well as the upgraded Pro package base price.

h2(#pro-enterprise). Upgrade from Pro to Enterprise

To upgrade your account from a Pro package, "contact us":https://ably.com/contact?cta=enterprise_package to discuss "Enterprise package":/docs/pricing/enterprise options.

h2(#downgrade). Downgrade

To downgrade your account from a Pro package:

1. Ensure you are the "account owner":/docs/account/users.
2. Log in to your "account":https://ably.com/login and select *Billing* from the *Account* menu.
3. Click the *Downgrade* button.

If you downgrade to a "Standard package":/docs/pricing/standard, you will finish the month on the Pro package with its associated limits and benefits. At the beginning of the following month you will receive a final invoice for the Pro package. Subsequent invoices will be for your Standard package.

If you downgrade to a "Free package":/docs/pricing/free, you will finish the month on the Pro package with its associated limits and benefits. At the beginning of the following month you will receive a final invoice covering your last month's consumption and package fee. Once the final invoice has been paid, your payment details are removed from the system.

If you wish to cancel your account, downgrade to the Free package first and then have the account owner "contact us":https://ably.com/support. Be aware that this will permanently delete all the information associated with your account.
