---
title: Standard package
meta_description: "Explore the features and cost of Ably's Standard package."
---

The Standard package is for when you're ready to start rolling out your application into production.

h2(#features). Features

The Standard package includes the following limits on the key units of consumption:

|_. Limit |_. Standard |
| Message rate (per second) | 2,500 |
| Messages (per month) | Unlimited |
| Concurrent channels | 10,000 |
| Concurrent connections | 10,000 |

Standard package users also have access to the following features:

* Google and GitHub SSO
* DataDog Lite (30 day trial)

h2(#pricing). Pricing and billing

The Standard package has a monthly fee of $29 plus the number of messages, and channel and connection minutes that you use on top of that. You will be billed for the previous month's consumption.

Note that volume discounts reset every month.

h2(#limits). Limits

"Compare the limits":/docs/pricing/limits associated with each package to see those available on the Standard package.

h2(#support). Support

Standard package support includes access to Ably support via email with a Service Level Agreement (SLA) of less than 1 business day for general guidance and for system impediments or system down.

h2(#free-standard). Upgrade from Free to Standard

To upgrade your account from a Free package to a Standard package:

1. Ensure you are the "account owner":/docs/account/users.
2. Log in to your "account":https://ably.com/login and select *Billing* from the *Account* menu.
3. Choose the plan you wish to upgrade to and follow the instructions. Upgrades take effect immediately.

Note that your first invoice will be issued at the start of the following calendar month. It covers consumption from the point of upgrade up until the end of that month. All subsequent invoices will follow the same pattern of billing for the previous month's consumption. The base package price will be charged pro-rata from the point in the month that you upgraded.

Once you upgrade to a Standard, your consumption is counted from that point onwards. For example, if you upgrade in the middle of the month, you are charged for the first message you send after upgrading, not after the 6,000,000 messages allowed on the Free package.

h2(#standard-pro). Upgrade from Standard to Pro

To upgrade your account from a Standard package to a Pro package:

1. Ensure you are the "account owner":/docs/account/users.
2. Log in to your "account":https://ably.com/login and select *Billing* from the *Account* menu.
3. Choose the plan you wish to upgrade to and follow the instructions. Upgrades take effect immediately.

The base package price will be charged pro-rata from the point in the month that you upgraded. This is true for the current Standard package base price, as well as the upgraded "Pro package":/docs/pricing/pro base price.

h2(#standard-enterprise). Upgrade from Standard to Enterprise

To upgrade your account from a Standard package to an "Enterprise package":/docs/pricing/enterprise, "contact us":https://ably.com/contact?cta=enterprise_package to discuss your options.

h2(#downgrade). Downgrade

To downgrade your account from a Standard package to a Free package:

1. Ensure you are the "account owner":/docs/account/users.
2. Log in to your "account":https://ably.com/login and select *Billing* from the *Account* menu.
3. Click the *Downgrade* button.

If you downgrade to a "Free package":/docs/pricing/free, you will finish the month on the Standard package with its associated limits and benefits. At the beginning of the following month you will receive a final invoice covering your last month's consumption and package fee. Once the final invoice has been paid, your payment details are removed from the system.

h2(#close). Close your account

You can close your account at any time by first "downgrading":#downgrade to the "Free package":/docs/pricing/free. The following steps outline the the process to close your account:

* Ensure you are the account "owner":/docs/account/users#roles.
* Downgrade all paid "packages":/docs/pricing#packages free packages:
** Navigate to *Account* then *Billing*.
** Click *Save billing details* to save your changes.
* After all packages have been downgraded to *Free*, go to the *My Settings* page.
** Navigate to *Want to delete your profile?*.
** Click *start* to begin the closure process.
* On the *Close Your Ably Account* page:
** Review the account summary, including ownership, plan type, and app details.
** Confirm all accounts are on the *Free* tier and details are accurate.
** Click *Confirm Closure* to permanently deactivate your Ably account.

If you sign in with SSO, for example, Google or GitHub, you cannot use the self-service account closure process. To proceed, you must set a password and disconnect their SSO provider via My Settings.

* Log in to your Ably account using your current SSO method (Google or GitHub).
* Navigate to *Account* then *My Settings*.
* In the *Password* section, click *Change your password*.
* Click *Update my personal settings* to save the changes.
* Scroll to the *Login provider* section.
* Click *remove connection* next to the SSO provider/s you want to disconnect.

<aside data-type='note'>
<p>Closing your account will permanently delete all associated data and cannot be undone.</p>
</aside>
