---
title: App API keys
meta_description: “Manage Ably API keys by creating, updating, setting restrictions, and exploring integration options.”
meta_keywords: "API keys, Ably, create key, update key, key restrictions, integration, webhooks, authentication"
---

The API keys tab lists all API keys associated with your account and provides information on each key's capabilities and restrictions. You can "create a new API key":#create and manage an API key.

h2(#create). Create a new API key

Click  *create new API key* to create a new API key. During the _create_ process, you can:
* Assign a friendly name.
* Give the new API key a descriptive name (e.g. chat app key) so it is easy to identify later.

h2(#manage). Manage an API key

To manage an API key, you set capabilities, define resource restrictions, use revocable tokens for security, and adjust key settings as needed.

h3. Capabilities

Capabilities provide permissions required for managing message flow, user presence, notifications, channel information, and access controls, these depend on what you require the API key to have access to:

|_. Capability |_. Description |
| *Publish* | Enable clients to publish messages to channels. |
| *Subscribe* | Enable clients to receive messages and presence state changes. |
| *History* | Enable permission to retrieve message and presence history. |
| *Presence* | Enable clients to register presence on a channel. |
| *Channel metadata* | Enable querying of channel metadata. |
| *Push admin and push-subscribe* | Manage and subscribe to push notifications. |
| *Statistics* | Access usage statistics. |
| *Privileged headers* | Set privileged headers, such as skipping channel rules. |

h3. Set resource restrictions

Set resource restrictions to control access to channels and queues, ranging from unrestricted access to specific, rule-based permissions:

|_. Restriction |_. Description |
| *None* | No restrictions; access any channel or queue. |
| *Only channels* | Access any channel but not queues. |
| *Only queues* | Access any queue but not channels. |
| *Selected channels and queues* | Specify explicit rules for access. |

h3. Revocable tokens

Revocable tokens enhance security by allowing shorter token lifetimes and the ability to revoke tokens issued via the API key.

|_. Option |_. Description |
| *Revocable tokens* | Implement security measures by setting shorter token lifetimes and enabling the ability to revoke tokens issued by the API key. |

h3. Change your API key settings

Click *settings* on the required API key to change its settings. The same settings apply as when creating a new API key.

h2. Integrations

You can configure and manage "integration":/docs/general/integrations rules, set up webhooks to connect Ably with other systems, and explore options for sending realtime data to third-party services like Datadog. Additionally, it provides access to tools for managing API keys, queues, and notifications.
