blang[jsall].
  @AuthOptions@ is a plain Javascript object and is used when making "authentication":/realtime/authentication requests. These options will supplement or override the corresponding options given when the library was instanced. The following attributes can be defined on the object:

blang[ruby].
  @AuthOptions@ is a Hash object and is used when making "authentication":/realtime/authentication requests. These options will supplement or override the corresponding options given when the library was instanced. The following key symbol values can be added to the Hash:

blang[python].
  @AuthOptions@ is a Dict and is used when making "authentication":/realtime/authentication requests. These options will supplement or override the corresponding options given when the library was instanced. The following key symbol values can be added to the Dict:

blang[php].
  @AuthOptions@ is an Associative Array and is used when making "authentication":/realtime/authentication requests. These options will supplement or override the corresponding options given when the library was instanced. The following named keys and values can be added to the Associative Array:

blang[java,swift,objc].
  <span lang="swift,objc">@ART@</span>@AuthOptions@ is used when making "authentication":/realtime/authentication requests. These options will supplement or override the corresponding options given when the library was instanced.

h4.
  default: Properties
  java:    Members
  ruby:    Attributes
  Python:  Attributes

- <span lang="default">authUrl</span><span lang="ruby">:auth_url</span><span lang="python">auth_url</span> := A URL that the library may use to obtain a token string (in plain text format), or a signed "@TokenRequest@":/realtime/types#token-request or "@TokenDetails@":/realtime/types#token-details (in JSON format). For example, this can be used by a client to obtain signed token requests from an application server.<br>__Type: @String@__

- <span lang="default">authMethod</span><span lang="ruby">:auth_method</span><span lang="python">auth_method</span> := _<span lang="default">@GET@</span><span lang="ruby">@:get@</span>_ The HTTP verb to use for the request, either <span lang="default">@GET@</span><span lang="ruby">@:get@</span> or <span lang="default">@POST@</span><span lang="ruby">@:post@</span><br>__Type: <span lang="default">@String@</span><span lang="ruby">@Symbol@</span>__

- <span lang="default">authHeaders</span><span lang="ruby">:auth_headers</span><span lang="python">auth_headers</span> := A set of key value pair headers to be added to any request made to the @authUrl@. Useful when an application requires these to be added to validate the request or implement the response.<br>__Type: <span lang="default">@Object@</span><span lang="ruby">@Hash@</span><span lang="php">@Associative Array@</span><span lang="java">@Param[]@</span>__

- <span lang="default">authParams</span><span lang="ruby">:auth_params</span><span lang="python">auth_params</span> := A set of key value pair params to be added to any request made to the @authUrl@. When the @authMethod@ is @GET@, query params are added to the URL, whereas when @authMethod@ is @POST@, the params are sent as URL encoded form data. Useful when an application require these to be added to validate the request or implement the response.<br>__Type: <span lang="default">@Object@</span><span lang="ruby">@Hash@</span><span lang="php">@Associative Array@</span><span lang="java">@Param[]@</span>__

- <span lang="default">force</span><span lang="ruby">:force</span><span lang="python">force</span> := _false_ When true, this indicates to "@authorise@":/realtime/authentication#authorise that a new token should be requested, even if the current token is still valid<br>__Type: @Boolean@__

- <span lang="default">key</span><span lang="ruby">:key</span><span lang="python">key</span> := Optionally the "API key":https://support.ably.io/solution/articles/3000030054-what-is-an-app-api-key to use can be specified as a full key string; if not, the API key passed into "@ClientOptions@":#client-options when instancing the Realtime or REST library is used<br>__Type: @String@__

- <span lang="default">queryTime</span><span lang="ruby">:query_time</span><span lang="python">query_time</span> := _false_ If true, the library will query the Ably servers for the current time instead of relying on a locally-available time of day<br>__Type: @Boolean@__

- <span lang="default">token</span><span lang="ruby">:token</span><span lang="python">token</span> := An authenticated token string that is most commonly obtained from the @token@ property of a "@TokenDetails@":/realtime/types#token-details component of a token request response. Use this option if you wish to use Token authentication. Read more about "Token authentication":/general/authentication#token-authentication<br>__Type: @String@__

- <span lang="default">tokenDetails</span><span lang="ruby">:token_details</span><span lang="python">token_details</span> := An authenticated "@TokenDetails@":/realtime/types/#token-details object that is most commonly obtained from of a token request response. Use this option if you wish to use Token authentication. Read more about "Token authentication":/general/authentication#token-authentication<br>__Type: @String@__

- <span lang="default">useTokenAuth</span><span lang="ruby">:use_token_auth</span><span lang="python">use_token_auth</span> := _false_ When true, forces "Token authentication":/general/authentication#token-authentication to be used by the libary<br>__Type: @Boolean@__
