h3(#channel-details). ChannelDetails

@ChannelDetails@ is an object returned when requesting or receiving "channel metadata":/realtime/channel-metadata. It contains information on the channel itself, along with the current state of the channel in the "ChannelStatus":#channel-status object.

- channelId := the required name of the channel including any qualifier, if any<br>__Type: @string@__
- region := in events relating to the activity of a channel in a specific region, this optionally identifies the region<br>__Type: @string@__
- isGlobalMaster := in events relating to the activity of a channel in a specific region, this optionally identifies whether or not that region is responsible for global coordination of the channel<br>__Type: @boolean@__
- status := an optional "@ChannelStatus@":#channel-status instance<br>__Type: "ChannelStatus":/#channel-status__

minimize. See an example @ChannelDetails@ JSON object
  ```[json]
    {
      "channelId": "foo",
      "status": {
        "isActive": true,
        "occupancy": {
          "metrics": {
            "connections": 1,
            "publishers": 1,
            "subscribers": 1,
            "presenceConnections": 1,
            "presenceMembers": 0,
            "presenceSubscribers": 1
          }
        }
      }
    }
  ```

h3(#channel-status). ChannelDetails.ChannelStatus

@ChannelStatus@ is contained within the "@ChannelDetails@":#channel-details object, and optionally contains an "Occupancy":#occupancy object.

- isActive := a required boolean value indicating whether the channel that is the subject of the event is active. For events indicating regional activity of a channel this indicates activity in that region, not global activity<br>__Type: @boolean@__
- occupancy := an optional "@Occupancy@":#occupancy instance indicating the occupancy of the channel. For events indicating regional activity of a channel this indicates activity in that region, not global activity.<br>__Type: "Occupancy":#occupancy__

h3(#occupancy). ChannelDetails.ChannelStatus.Occupancy

Occupancy is optionally contained within the above "@ChannelStatus@":#channel-status object, and contains metadata relating to the occupants of the channel. This is usually contained within the @occupancy@ attribute of the "@ChannelStatus@":#channel-status object. Membership categories include:

- publishers := the number of connections attached to the channel that are authorised to publish<br>__Type: @integer@__
- subscribers := the number of connections attached that are authorised to subscribe to messages<br>__Type: @integer@__
- presenceSubscribers := the number of connections that are authorised to subscribe to presence messages<br>__Type: @integer@__
- presenceConnections := the number of connections that are authorised to enter members into the presence channel<br>__Type: @integer@__
- presenceMembers := the number of members currently entered into the presence channel<br>__Type: @integer@__
