blang[jsall].
  @ChannelOptions@, a plain Javascript object, may optionally be specified when instancing a "@Channel@":/realtime/channels-messages, and this may be used to specify channel-specific options. The following attributes can be defined on the object:

blang[ruby].
  @ChannelOptions@, a Hash object, may optionally be specified when instancing a "@Channel@":/realtime/channels-messages, and this may be used to specify channel-specific options. The following key symbol values can be added to the Hash:

blang[java].
  @io.ably.lib.types.ChannelOptions@ may optionally be specified when instancing a "@Channel@":/realtime/channels-messages, and this may be used to specify channel-specific options.

Currently the supported channel options are only encryption-related.

h4.
  default: Properties
  java:    Members
  ruby:    Attributes

- <span lang="ruby">@:@</span>@encrypted@ := Requests encryption for this channel.<br>__Type: Boolean__

- <div lang="jsall">@cipherParams@</div> := Specifies encryption-related parameters (such as algorithm, chaining mode, key length and key). When providing only the required @key@ property, the default cipher @AES-CBC-128@ will be used. The Javascript library currently supports @algorithm@, @key@ and @iv@ cipher params.  Additionally, the default cipher params for the Javascript implementation may be obtained by calling @Ably.Realtime.Crypto.getDefaultParams()@.<br>__Type: Object__
- <div lang="java">@cipherParams@</div> := Specifies encryption-related parameters (such as algorithm, chaining mode, key length and key). When providing only the required @key@ property, the default cipher @AES-CBC-128@ will be used. The Java library currently supports @algorithm@, @key@, and @iv@ cipher params.  Additionally, the default cipher params for the Java implementation may be obtained by calling @Crypto.getDefaultParams()@.<br>__Type: Object__
- <div lang="ruby">@:cipher_params@</div> := Specifies encryption-related parameters (such as algorithm, chaining mode, key length and key). When providing only the required @key@ property, the default cipher @AES-CBC-128@ will be used. The Ruby library currently supports @algorithm@, @key@, @mode@, @key_length@ and @iv@ cipher params.<br>__Type: Hash object__
