blang[jsall].
  @ChannelEvent@ is a String that can be emitted as an event on the @Channel@ object; either a "@ChannelState@":/realtime/channels#channel-states or an @update@ event.

  ```[javascript]
    var ChannelEvents = [
      'initialized',
      'attaching',
      'attached',
      'detaching',
      'detached',
      'failed',
      'suspended',
      'update'
    ]
  ```

blang[java].
  @io.ably.lib.realtime.ChannelEvent@ is an enum representing all the events that can be emitted be the @Channel@; either a "@ChannelState@":/realtime/channels#channel-states or an @update@ event.

  ```[java]
    public enum ChannelEvent {
      initialized,  // 0
      attaching,    // 1
      attached,     // 2
      detaching,    // 3
      detached,     // 4
      failed        // 5
      update        // 6
    }
  ```

blang[csharp].
  @IO.Ably.Realtime.ChannelEvent@ is an enum representing all the events that can be emitted be the @Channel@; either a "@ChannelState@":/realtime/channels#channel-states or an @Update@ event.

  ```[csharp]
    public enum ChannelEvent
    {
        Initialized = 0,
        Attaching = 1,
        Attached = 2,
        Detaching= 3,
        Detached = 4,
        Failed = 5,
        Update = 6
    };
  ```

blang[ruby].
  @Ably::Realtime::Channel::EVENT@ is an enum-like value representing all the events that can be emitted be the @Channel@; either a "@ChannelState@":/realtime/channels#channel-states or an @:update@ event. @EVENT@ can be represented interchangeably as either symbols or constants.

  h4. Symbol states

  ```[ruby]
    :initialized # => 0
    :attaching # =>   1
    :attached # =>    2
    :detaching # =>   3
    :detached # =>    4
    :failed # =>      5
    :update # =>      6
  ```

  h4. Constant states

  ```[ruby]
    Channel::EVENT.Initialized # => 0
    Channel::EVENT.Attaching # =>   1
    Channel::EVENT.Attached # =>    2
    Channel::EVENT.Detaching # =>   3
    Channel::EVENT.Detached # =>    4
    Channel::EVENT.Failed # =>      5
    Channel::EVENT.Update # =>      6
  ```

blang[objc,swift].
  @ARTChannelEvent@ is the enum emitted as the event in @ARTRealtimeChannel.on@; either a "@ChannelState@":/realtime/channels#channel-state or an @Update@ event.

  ```[objc]
    typedef NS_ENUM(NSUInteger, ARTChannelEvent) {
        ARTChannelEventInitialized,
        ARTChannelEventAttaching,
        ARTChannelEventAttached,
        ARTChannelEventDetaching,
        ARTChannelEventDetached,
        ARTChannelEventFailed,
        ARTChannelEventUpdate
    };
  ```

  ```[swift]
    enum ARTChannelEvent : UInt {
        case Initialized
        case Attaching
        case Attached
        case Detaching
        case Detached
        case Failed
        case Update
    }
  ```

blang[go].
  @ChannelEvent@ is a String that can be emitted as an event on the @Channel@ object; either a "@ChannelState@":/realtime/channels#channel-states or an @update@ event.
  
  ```[go]
    const (
      StateChanInitialized = 256
      StateChanConnecting = 512
      StateChanConnected = 1024
      StateChanDisconnected = 2048
      StateChanSuspended = 4096
      StateChanClosing = 8192
      StateChanClosed = 16384
      StateChanFailed = 32768
    )
  ```
