- <span lang="default">queueMessages</span><span lang="ruby">:queue_messages</span> := _true_ If false, this disables the default behaviour whereby the library queues messages on a connection in the disconnected or connecting states. The default behaviour allows applications to submit messages immediately upon instancing the library without having to wait for the connection to be established. Applications may use this option to disable queuing if they wish to have application-level control over the queueing under those conditions.<br>__Type: @Boolean@__

- <span lang="default">echoMessages</span><span lang="ruby">:echo_messages</span> := _true_ If false, prevents messages originating from this connection being echoed back on the same connection.<br>__Type: @Boolean@__

- <span lang="default">autoConnect</span><span lang="ruby">:auto_connect</span> := _true_ By default as soon as the client library is instanced it will connect to Ably. You can optionally set this to false and explicitly connect to Ably when require using the "@connect@":/realtime/usage/#connect method.<br>__Type: @Boolean@__

- <span lang="default">recover</span><span lang="ruby">:recover</span> := This option allows a connection to inherit the state of a previous connection that may have existed under a different instance of the Realtime library. This might typically be used by clients of the browser library to ensure connection state can be preserved when the user refreshes the page. See "connection state recovery":/realtime/connection/#connection-state-recovery for further information on this option.<br>__Type: @String@__

- <span lang="default">queryTime</span><span lang="ruby">:query_time</span> := _false_ If true, the library will query the Ably servers for the current time instead of relying on a locally-available time of day<br>__Type: @Boolean@__

- <span lang="default">defaultTokenParams</span><span lang="ruby">:default_token_params</span> := When a "TokenParams":/realtime/types#token-params object is provided, it will override the client library defaults when issuing new tokens or token requests<br>__Type: "@TokenParams@":/realtime/types#token-params__

- <span lang="default">disconnectedRetryTimeout</span><span lang="ruby">:disconnected_retry_timeout</span> := _<span lang="default">15,000ms</span><span lang="ruby">15s</span>_ When the connection enters the @DISCONNECTED@ state, after this delay <span lang="default">in milliseconds</span><span lang="ruby">in seconds</span><span lang="objc,swift">as a @NSTimeInterval@</span>, if the state is still @DISCONNECTED@, the client library will attempt to reconnect automatically<br>__Type: <span lang="default">@Integer@</span><span lang="objc,swift">@NSTimeInterval@</span>__

- <span lang="default">suspendedRetryTimeout</span><span lang="ruby">:suspended_retry_timeout</span> := _<span lang="default">30,000ms</span><span lang="ruby">30s</span>_ When the connection enters the @SUSPENDED@ state, after this delay <span lang="default">in milliseconds</span><span lang="ruby">in seconds</span><span lang="objc,swift">as a @NSTimeInterval@</span>, if the state is still @SUSPENDED@, the client library will attempt to reconnect automatically<br>__Type: <span lang="default">@Integer@</span><span lang="objc,swift">@NSTimeInterval@</span>__
