A @Stats@ object represents a application statistic for the specified interval and time period. Ably aggregates statistics globally for all accounts and applications, and makes these available both through our "statistics API":/realtime/statistics as well as your "application dashboard":https://support.ably.io/solution/articles/3000030053-how-do-i-access-my-app-dashboard.

Please note that most attributes of the @Stats@ type below contain references to further stats types. This documentation is not exhaustive for all stats stypes, and as such, links to the stats types below will take you to the "Ruby library stats documentation":http://www.rubydoc.info/gems/ably/Ably/Models/Stats which contains exhaustive stats documentation. Ruby however uses @under_score@ case instead of the default @camelCase@ in most languages, so please bear that in mind.

h4.
  default: Properties
  java:    Members
  ruby:    Attributes

- all := aggregate count of both @inbound@ and @outbound@ message stats<br>__Type: "MessageTypes":http://www.rubydoc.info/gems/ably/Ably/Models/Stats/MessageTypes__
- <span lang="default">apiRequests</span><span lang="ruby">api_requests</span> := breakdown of API requests received via the Ably REST API<br>__Type: "RequestCount":http://www.rubydoc.info/gems/ably/Ably/Models/Stats/RequestCount__
- channels := breakdown of channel related stats such as min, mean and peak channels<br>__Type: "ResourceCount":http://www.rubydoc.info/gems/ably/Ably/Models/Stats/ResourceCount__
- connections := breakdown of connection related stats such as min, mean and peak channels for TLS and non-TLS connections<br>__Type: "ConnectionTypes":http://www.rubydoc.info/gems/ably/Ably/Models/Stats/ConnectionTypes__
- inbound := statistics such as count and data for all inbound messages received over REST and Realtime connection, broken down by normal channel messages or presence messages<br>__Type: "MessageTraffic":http://www.rubydoc.info/gems/ably/Ably/Models/Stats/MessageTraffic__
- <div lang="ruby">interval_granularity</div> := A "@GRANULARITY@":http://www.rubydoc.info/gems/ably/Ably/Models/Stats#GRANULARITY-constant constant representing the granularity (interval) of this statistic such as @:minute@, @:hour@, @:day@, @:month@.<br>__Type: "@Stats::GRANULARITY@":http://www.rubydoc.info/gems/ably/Ably/Models/Stats#GRANULARITY-constant__
- <span lang="default">intervalId</span><span lang="ruby">interval_id</span> := the interval ID provides both the time from which the interval starts as well as the length of time that this statistic covers i.e. the period of time which the stats are aggregated for. For example, an interval ID value of "2016-03-01:10:02" represents a single minute interval for the UTC time presented in the string. However, an interval ID of "2016-03" represents a month interval for the entire month of March 2016 based on UTC time.<br>__Type: String__
- <div lang="ruby">interval_time</div> := A @Time@ object representing the start of the interval
- outbound := statistics such as count and data for all oubound messages retrieved via REST history requests, received over Realtime connections, or pushed with WebHooks, broken down by normal channel messages or presence messages<br>__Type: "MessageTraffic":http://www.rubydoc.info/gems/ably/Ably/Models/Stats/MessageTraffic__
- persisted := messages persisted and later retrieved via the "history API":/realtime/history<br>__Type: "MessageTypes":http://www.rubydoc.info/gems/ably/Ably/Models/Stats/MessageTypes__
- <span lang="default">tokenRequests</span><span lang="ruby">token_requests</span> := breakdown of Token requests received via the Ably REST API.<br>__Type: "RequestCount":http://www.rubydoc.info/gems/ably/Ably/Models/Stats/RequestCount__
