@TokenDetails@ is a type providing details of Ably Token string and its associated metadata.

h4.
  default: Properties
  java:    Members
  ruby:    Attributes

- <span lang="default">token</span><span lang="csharp">Token</span> := The "Ably Token":/core-features/authentication#ably-tokens itself. A typical "Ably Token":/core-features/authentication#ably-tokens string may appear like @{{TOKEN}}@<br>__Type: @String@__
- <span lang="default">expires</span><span lang="csharp">Expires</span> := <span lang="default">The time (in milliseconds since the epoch)</span><span lang="ruby,objc,swift">The time</span> at which this token expires<br>__Type: <span lang="default">@Integer@</span><span lang="java">@Long Integer@</span><span lang="csharp">@DateTimeOffset@</span><span lang="ruby">@Time@</span><span lang="objc,swift">@NSDate@</span>__
- <span lang="default">issued</span><span lang="csharp">Issued</span> :=  <span lang="default">The time (in milliseconds since the epoch)</span><span lang="ruby,objc,swift">The time</span> at which this token was issued<br>__Type: <span lang="default">@Integer@</span><span lang="java">@Long Integer@</span><span lang="csharp">@DateTimeOffset@</span><span lang="ruby">@Time@</span><span lang="objc,swift">@NSDate@</span>__
- <span lang="default">capability</span><span lang="csharp">Capability</span> :=  The capability associated with this "Ably Token":/core-features/authentication#ably-tokens. The capability is a a JSON stringified canonicalized representation of the resource paths and associated operations. "Read more about authentication and capabilities":/core-features/authentication/#capabilities-explained<br>__Type: <span lang="default">@String@</span><span lang="csharp">@Capability@</span>__
- <span lang="default">clientId</span><span lang="ruby,python">client_id</span><span lang="csharp">ClientId</span> := The client ID, if any, bound to this "Ably Token":/core-features/authentication#ably-tokens. If a client ID is included, then the "Ably Token":/core-features/authentication#ably-tokens authenticates its bearer as that client ID, and the "Ably Token":/core-features/authentication#ably-tokens may only be used to perform operations on behalf of that client ID. The client is then considered to be an "identified client":/core-features/authentication#identified-clients<br>__Type: @String@__

blang[ruby].
  h3. Methods

  - expired? := True when the token has expired<br>__Type: @Boolean@__

blang[python].
  h3. Methods

  - is_expired() := True when the token has expired<br>__Type: @Boolean@__

blang[csharp].
  h3. Methods

  - IsValidToken() := True if the token has not expired<br>__Type: @Boolean@__

h3.
  default: TokenDetails constructors

h4(#token-details-from-json).
  default: TokenDetails.fromJson
  ruby: TokenDetails.from_json

bq(definition).
  default: TokenDetails.fromJson(String json) -> TokenDetails
  ruby: TokenDetails.from_json(String json) -> TokenDetails

bq(definition).
  default: TokenDetails.fromJson(Object json) -> TokenDetails
  ruby: TokenDetails.from_json(Object json) -> TokenDetails

A static factory method to create a "@TokenDetails@":/realtime/types#token-details from a deserialized @TokenDetails@-like object or a JSON stringified @TokenDetails@. This method is provided to minimize bugs as a result of differing types by platform for fields such as @timestamp@ or @ttl@. For example, in Ruby @ttl@ in the @TokenDetails@ object is exposed in seconds as that is idiomatic for the language, yet when serialized to JSON using @to_json@ it is automatically converted to the Ably standard which is milliseconds. By using the @fromJson@ method when constructing a @TokenDetails@, Ably ensures that all fields are consistently serialized and deserialized across platforms.

h4. Parameters

- json := a @TokenDetails@-like deserialized object or JSON stringified @TokenDetails@.<br>__Type: @Object, String@__

h4. Returns

A "@TokenDetails@":/realtime/types#token-details object
