---
title: Two-factor authentication (2FA)
meta_description: "Enable two-factor authentication for your Ably account."
meta_keywords: "2FA, two-factor, authentication, MFA"
---

Two-factor authentication (2FA) is an authentication process requiring users to utilize two different forms of verification. 2FA for your Ably account requires your password and a security token sent to your mobile phone.

h2(#enable). Enable 2FA

To enable 2FA for your own user login:

1. Log in to your "account":https://ably.com/accounts/any.
2. Select *My Settings* from the account navigation dropdown.
3. Toggle *Enable Two-Factor Authentication* under the *Two-factor authentication* section.
** Re-enter your password as prompted.
4. Select your *Country*.
5. Enter your *Phone number*
6. Click *Next* to receive an SMS with a security token.
7. Enter the security token and click *Verify security code*.
8. Scan the QR code into an authenticator app such as Authy, or Google Authenticator.
9. Store your recovery codes in a safe location.

h3(#disable). Disable 2FA

To disable 2FA for your own user login:

1. Log in to your "account":https://ably.com/accounts/any.
2. Select *My Settings* from the account navigation dropdown.
3. Click the *Disable Two-Factor Authentication* button.
** Re-enter your password as prompted.

h3(#phone). Change phone number

Disable and re-enable 2FA in order to update your phone number.

h3(#sms). SMS and TOTP 2FA

Disable and re-enable 2FA in order to switch between SMS 2FA and TOTP (time-based one-time password) 2FA.

h2(#enforce). Enforce 2FA for all users

"Account owners":/account/users can require 2FA to be utilized by all users. Any user that hasn't already enabled 2FA will be prompted to do so the next time they attempt to access the account.

<aside data-type='note'>
<p>The account owner must already have 2FA enabled for their own login before they can enforce it account-wide.</p>
</aside>

To enforce 2FA for all users:

1. Log in to your "account":https://ably.com/accounts/any.
2. Select *Settings* from the account navigation dropdown.
3. Toggle *Require Two-Factor Authentication for all account users* under the *Authentication Settings* section.
4. *Save* the authentication settings.

h3(#remove). Remove 2FA requirement of all users

To remove the requirement for all users to authenticate with 2FA:

1. Log in to your "account":https://ably.com/accounts/any.
2. Select *Settings* from the account navigation dropdown.
3. Toggle *Require Two-Factor Authentication for all account users* under the *Authentication Settings* section.
4. *Save* the authentication settings.
