---
title: Organizations
meta_description: "Manage Ably organizations, provision users, configure SSO with SCIM, and handle account roles and permissions."
meta_keywords: "Ably organizations, user provisioning, SSO, SCIM, access management, Ably dashboard, account roles, permissions"
---

Use organizations to manage multiple Ably accounts by centralizing user access and permissions under a single organizational structure. Organizations streamline user provisioning through a Single Sign-On (SSO) configuration and utilize System for Cross-domain Identity Management (SCIM) for group-based access control.

Organizations enable you to assign roles and permissions across different accounts, such as production, staging, and development environments.

<aside data-type='note'>
<p>An "Enterprise":/pricing/enterprise account is required to use organizations. "Contact us":https://ably.com/contact to enable organizations for your account.</p>
</aside>

h2(#primary). Primary account

The primary account is an organization's main account and holds the following privileges:

* The highest level of access to the organization.
* Ownership of all all accounts within the organization.
* The default account used for provisioning.

h2(#accounts). Create accounts in an organization

Create "accounts":https://ably.com/accounts/any in an organization:

* Open the *Account* navigation dropdown.
** Click *Organization Accounts*.
** Click *New account*.
** Add an account name and *Create account*.

h3(#isolate). Isolate environments

Use separate accounts within an organization to create isolated environments, such as production, staging, and development. Assign each environment a "package":/pricing#packages that meets its specific needs. For example, production may need high capacity with an Enterprise package, staging might use a Standard package, and development a Free package.

h2(#manage). Manage user account access

"Managing user":/account/users account access allows control of both organizational management permissions and access to specific accounts within your organization.

Manage user account access:

* Open the *Account* navigation dropdown.
** Click *Organization Users* to view the list of users.
** Select the *user* whose access you want to manage.
** Specify the user's required *Permissions* for the account.
** Assign the necessary *Roles* to grant the user access to specific *Accounts*.
** Click *Back to Organization users* to save your changes.
* Add the user to a new account.
** Enter the account name.
** Click *Create Account*.

<aside data-type='note'>
<p>Users provisioned through SCIM cannot modify their name or email address within Ably. All personal information updates must be made through your identity provider, and changes will sync to Ably upon the next SCIM update cycle.</p>
</aside>

h3(#permissions). User permissions

A user's total permissions consist of:

* Roles and permissions assigned directly to the user.
* Roles and permissions granted to all groups the user is part of.

h2(#scim). Provision users via SCIM

<aside data-type='note'>
<p>Google Workspace _alone_ does not natively support SCIM.</p>
</aside>

"Manage access":/account/users to multiple Ably accounts through a single identity provider. To enable this, configure both "SSO":/account/sso with your chosen identity provider and "SCIM":#SCIM. Once configured, Ably automatically provisions and deprovisions users with access to the Ably app in your identity provider, either individually or through assigned groups. New users are added to Ably's default provisioning account with the role of *Developer*.

<aside data-type='important'>
	<p>Ably will reject any SCIM-provisioned user whose email address hasn't been pre-approved and added to your organization by Ably support. Ensure all users you intend to provision are registered with Ably beforehand.</p>
	</aside>

h3(#app). Setup an identity provider's app

To "group permissions":#permissions and "provision":#provision users with SCIM you need to enable "SSO":/account/sso with your chosen identity provider.

h3(#group). Group permissions via SCIM

When you enable "SSO":/account/sso with your chosen identity provider, you assign users and groups to the new identity provider's app. The group you created in identity provider's app is available to view and for user access management within Ably:

* Open the *Account* navigation dropdown.
** Click *Organization Users*.
** Under *Ably Realtime identity provider groups*, click *Manage account access*.
** Select the user's account access you want to manage.
** Specify the user's required *Permissions* for the organization.
** Assign the necessary *Roles* for required *Account* access.


<aside data-type='note'>
<p>When you adjust a user's individual roles and permissions, permissions assigned via groups appear greyed out, indicating they cannot be modified individually. </p>
</aside>

h3(#provision). Provision users

Provisioning users enables you to grant multiple users access to your organization, either automatically via "SCIM":#scim or "manually":#manual through user invitations.

<aside data-type='note'>
<p>Provisioning users via SSO is recommended over manual invitation because it strengthens security by centralizing access control, enhances operational efficiency through automation, and improves the user experience with quicker access. Provisioning users via SSO also ensures compliance with regulatory requirements, and reduces the risk of human error.</p>
</aside>

h4(#ably). Configure Ably SSO

"Configuring SSO":/account/sso#configure between Ably and your chosen identity provider enables authentication by linking Ably's SAML-based SSO with the identity provider. This setup allows users to access Ably through their organizational credentials.

h4(#copy). Copy Ably SSO configuration values

Start the configuration process by copying Ably's SSO configuration values:

* Open the *Account* navigation dropdown.
** Click *Organization Settings*.
** Under *Single Sign-On (SSO)* enable SSO.
** Copy the *Single sign-on URL* and *Audience URI (SP Entity ID):* values.

h4(#complete). Complete Ably SSO Configuration

Finish the configuration process via Ably:

* In your Ably account dashboard, go back to *Settings* > *Authentication Settings*.
* Paste and *Save* the values obtained from your identity provider's app:
** *Identity Provider Single Sign-On URL*.
** *Identity Provider Issuer*.
** *X.509 Certificate* and *Save SSO Settings*.

h4(#SCIM). Configure Ably for SCIM with your chosen identity provider

The process for enabling SCIM with your chosen identity provider starts in your Ably account. Then, with the identity provider, set up API integration by linking to Ably's SCIM details and configuring user provisioning options. Finally, enable the identity provider's provisioning features to manage user access with your Ably integration.

h4(#values). Copy Ably SCIM configuration values

Start the Ably SCIM configuration process by copying *Ably's Users & groups provisioning (SCIM)* configuration values:

* Open the *Account* navigation dropdown.
** Click *Organization Settings*.
** Under *Users & groups provisioning (SCIM)*
** Copy the *Service Provider Configuration Endpoint*, *SCIM Username*, and *SCIM Password* values.

h4(#provision). Setup identity provider's provisioning

Configure SCIM provisioning with your identity provider:

* Access the provisioning or API integration section within your application's settings.
* Enable the API integration feature.
* Enter the following credentials provided by your service provider:
** Service provider's configuration endpoint.
** SCIM username.
** SCIM password.
* Set the unique identifier field for users (typically the email attribute).
* Select the supported provisioning actions you wish to enable, such as:
** Pushing new users.
** Profile updates.
** Groups.
* Test the connector configuration to verify the connection, and save your settings.

h4(#enable). Enable provisioning in your identity provider's app

To complete the user provisioning settings in your identity provider:

* Navigate to the provisioning or user management section within your application's settings.
* Enable the options to:
** Create users.
** Update user attributes.
** Deactivate users.
* Verify your application's settings, and save.


h2(#manual). Provision users without SSO

If your organization doesn't use Single Sign-On (SSO), you can manually add users:

* Open the *Account* navigation dropdown.
** Select *Organization Users* to view all users in your organization.
** Click *Invite new user* to open the *Invite a user to join* page.
** Enter the users *Name* and *Email*.
** Specify the user's required *Permissions* for the organization.
** Assign the necessary *Roles* for the required *Account* access.
** Click *Invite user via email* to complete the invitation.
