---
title: User management
meta_description: "Learn how to manage users, user roles, and the permissions associated with each role."
meta_keywords: "users, user management, admin, owner, permission"
---

The user that creates an Ably account is assigned the account owner role. An account owner has permission to undertake any action within an account, such as inviting new users. There are two other account roles that inherit a subset of an account owner's permissions. An account can only have a single account owner.

h2(#roles). User roles

Users can be assigned to the following roles. Each user may be assigned multiple roles:

* Developer
* Billing
* Admin
* Owner

User roles have the following permissions:

|_. Permission |_. Developer |_. Billing |_. Admin |_. Owner |
| View all apps | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |
| View app configuration | ✓ | - | ✓ | ✓ |
| View app settings | ✓ | - | ✓ | ✓ |
| View "app statistics":/docs/metadata-stats/stats#app | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |
| View "account statistics":/docs/metadata-stats/stats#account | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |
| Configure own "2FA":/docs/account/2fa | ✓ | - | ✓ | ✓ |
| "Invite new users":#invite | - | - | ✓ | ✓ |
| "Remove existing users":#remove | - | - | ✓ | ✓ |
| Manage "API keys":/docs/auth | - | - | ✓ | ✓ |
| Manage app configuration | - | - | ✓ | ✓ |
| Manage app settings | - | - | ✓ | ✓ |
| Create apps | - | - | ✓ | ✓ |
| Receive "limit notifications":/docs/platform/pricing/limits | - | - | ✓ | ✓ |
| Configure "single sign-on":/docs/account/sso | - | - | - | ✓ |
| Enforce "2FA":/docs/account/2fa#enforce | - | - | - | ✓ |
| View invoices | - | ✓ | - | ✓ |
| Update billing information | - | ✓ | - | ✓ |
| Manage "account package":https://ably.com/pricing | - | - | - | ✓ |

h3(#change). Change user roles

The following steps add or remove roles from a user within an Ably account. You must be an account owner or admin to change user roles:

1. Log in to your "account":https://ably.com/accounts/any.
2. Select *Users* from the account navigation dropdown.
3. Click the checkboxes corresponding to the roles you want to add or remove.

<aside data-type='note'>
<p> Follow "this process":https://faqs.ably.com/can-i-change-my-ably-account-owner to transfer account ownership.</p>
</aside>

h2(#invite). Invite a new user

The following steps invite a new user to your account. You must be an account owner or admin to invite new users:

1. Log in to your "account":https://ably.com/accounts/any.
2. Select *Users* from the account navigation dropdown.
3. Click *Invite new user*.
4. Enter the user's first name and email address, then click *Invite*.
5. The user can then follow the instructions emailed to them to join your account.

<aside data-type='note'>
<p> You can view the status of pending invitations from the *Users* page. You can also re-send or revoke an invitation.</p>
</aside>

h2(#remove). Remove users from an account

The following steps remove a user from your account. You must be an account owner or admin to remove users:

1. Log in to your "account":https://ably.com/accounts/any.
2. Select *Users* from the account navigation dropdown.
3. Click the *Remove* button next to the user to remove them from the account.
4. Confirm the action when prompted.

h2(#leave). Delete your profile or leave an account

The following steps delete your profile or remove yourself from an Ably account:

1. Log in to your "account":https://ably.com/accounts/any.
2. Go to "My Settings":https://ably.com/users/edit.
3. "Disconnect SSO provider":#sso if you use SSO to log in.
4. Scroll to *"Want to delete your profile?"*
5. Click *Start* to remove yourself from this account.

<aside data-type='important'>
<p>*Account owners:* Deleting your profile will delete the entire account and all data. You must first "transfer ownership":https://faqs.ably.com/can-i-change-my-ably-account-owner to another user before deleting your profile.</p>
</aside>

h2(#close). Close your account

To close your Ably account, you must be the account owner and have downgraded to the Free package. The following steps outline the process to close your account:

* Log in to your "Ably account":https://ably.com/accounts/any.
* Confirm that you are the "account owner":/docs/account/users#roles.
* "Downgrade your current package":/docs/pricing/free#downgrade to the "Free package":/docs/pricing#packages.

<aside data-type='note'>
  <p>You will not be able to delete your account until the 1st of the month following your downgrade, after your final invoice has been paid. </p>
</aside>

* "Disconnect SSO provider":#sso if you use SSO to log in.
* Go to your "My Settings":https://ably.com/users/edit page.
* Scroll to *Want to delete your profile?*

<aside data-type='note'>
  <p>If you are using an SSO login you'll see a *Contact us* link instead of a *Start* button, you'll need to "disconnect your SSO provider":#sso first. </p>
</aside>

* Click *Start* to proceed with permanently closing your account.
* On the proceeding *Close Your Ably Account* page, review the accounts for closure.
* Click *Close Account* to permanently deactivate your account.

h3(#sso). Disconnect SSO provider

If you use SSO (Single Sign-On) to log in to your Ably account, you must first set a password and disconnect your SSO provider before closing your account. The self-service account closure process requires a password to authenticate the closure request. The following steps set a password and disconnect your SSO provider:

* Log in to your "account":https://ably.com/accounts/any using your current SSO method (Google or GitHub).
* Navigate to *Account* then "My Settings.":https://ably.com/users/edit
* In the *Password* section, click *Change your password*.
* Click *Update my personal settings* to save the changes.
* Scroll to the *Login provider* section.
* Click *remove connection* next to the SSO provider/s you want to disconnect.
* After completing these steps, return to the instructions above to "close your account":#close.
