---
title: AMQP rule
meta_description: "Ably allows you to send data to AMQP based on message, channel lifecycle, channel occupancy, and presence events."
meta_keywords: "AMQP, integrations, events, serverless"
languages:
  - none
redirect_from:
  - /general/firehose/amqp-rule
---

You can use a AMQP rule to send "data":/integrations/payloads#sources such as messages, occupancy, lifecycle and presence events from Ably to AMQP.

h2(#creating-amqp-rule). Creating a AMQP rule

There are two ways to create a AMQP rule:

* Using the "Ably Dashboard":https://ably.com/dashboard.
* Using the "Control API":/account/control-api.

h3(#creating-rule-dashboard). Creating a AMQP rule in the dashboard

To create a rule in your "dashboard":https://ably.com/dashboard#58:

* Login and select the application you wish to integrate with AMQP.
* Click the *Integrations* tab.
* Click the *+ New Integration Rule* button.
* Choose Firehose.
* Choose AMQP.
* Configure the settings applicable to your use case and your AMQP installation.
* Click *Create* to create the rule.

h4(#header). APMQ header and authentication settings:

|_. Section            |_. Purpose                                                                                                   |
|URL                   |Specifies the AMQP connection URL in the format `amqps://username:password@host.name/vhost`.                 |
|Headers               |Allows the inclusion of additional information in key-value format.                                          |
|Another header button |Adds additional headers for the message.                                                                     |


h4(#general). APMQ general rule settings

The following explains the APMQ general rule settings:

|_. Section                |_. Purpose                                                                                             |
|URL                       |Specifies the HTTPS URL for the SQS queue, including credentials, region, and stream name.             |
|AWS region                |Defines the AWS region associated with the SQS queue.                                                  |
|AWS authentication scheme |Allows selection of the authentication method: AWS credentials or ARN of an assumable role.            |
|AWS credentials           |Enter AWS credentials in `key:value` format for authentication.                                        |

h4(#specific). APMQ-specific settings

The following explains the APMQ-specific settings:

|_. Section            |_. Purpose                                                                                                         |
|Routing key           |Specifies the routing key used by the AMQP exchange to route messages to a physical queue. Supports interpolation. |
|Route mandatory       |Ensures delivery is rejected if the route does not exist.                                                          |
|Route persistent      |Marks messages as persistent, instructing the broker to write them to disk if the queue is durable.                |
|Optional TTL (minutes)|Allows overriding the default queue TTL for messages to be persisted.                                              |
|Create button         |Click to save and provision the AMQP settings.                                                                     |
|Cancel button         |Click to cancel the configuration and return to the previous screen.                                               |


h3(#creating-rule-control-api). Creating a AMQP rule using Control API

See some examples of creating rules in the "rules section":/account/control-api#examples-rules of the Control API documentation. You can also refer to the "rule section":/api/control-api#tag/rules/paths/~1apps~1{app_id}~1rules/post of the Control API Reference for information on creating a AMQP rule. You will need to select a @ruleType@ of @amqp@.
