---
title: AWS Kinesis rule
meta_description: "Ably allows you to send data to Kinesis based on message, channel lifecycle, channel occupancy, and presence events."
meta_keywords: "Kinesis, integrations, events, serverless"
languages:
  - none
redirect_from:
  - /general/firehose/kinesis-rule
---

You can use a Kinesis rule to send "data":/general/firehose#data-sources such as messages, occupancy, lifecycle and presence events from Ably to Kinesis.

h2(#creating-kinesis-rule). Creating a Kinesis rule

There are two ways to create a Kinesis rule:

* Using the "Ably Dashboard":https://ably.com/dashboard.
* Using the "Control API":/account/control-api.

h3(#creating-rule-dashboard). Creating a Kinesis rule in the dashboard

To create a rule in your "dashboard":https://ably.com/dashboard#58:

* Login and select the application you wish to integrate with Kinesis.
* Click the *Integrations* tab.
* Click the *+ New Integration Rule* button.
* Choose Firehose.
* Choose AWS Kinesis.
* Configure the settings applicable to your use case and your Kinesis installation.
* Click *Create* to create the rule.

h4(#aws). AWS Kinesis rule settings

The following explains the AWS Kinesis generalrule settings:

|_. Section                |_. Purpose                                                                     |
|AWS Region                |Specifies the AWS region for the Kinesis Stream.                               |
|Stream Name               |Defines the name of the Kinesis Stream to connect to.                          |
|AWS authentication scheme |Choose the authentication method: AWS credentials or ARN of an assumable role. |
|AWS Credentials           |Enter your AWS credentials in `key:value` format.                              |

h4(#general). Kinesis general rule settings

The following explains the Kinesis general rule settings:

|_. Section      |_. Purpose                                                                         |
|Source          |Defines the type of event to deliver .                                             |
|Channel filter  |Allows filtering of the rule using a regular expression matching the channel name. |
|Encoding        |Selects a setting for encoding the payload.                                        |
|Enveloped       |When checked, wraps payloads with additional metadata. Uncheck for raw payloads.   |


h3(#creating-rule-control-api). Creating a Kinesis rule using Control API

See some examples of creating rules in the "rules section":/account/control-api#examples of the Control API documentation. You can also refer to the "rule section":/api/control-api#tag/rules/paths/~1apps~1{app_id}~1rules/post of the Control API Reference for information on creating a Kinesis rule. You will need to select a @ruleType@ of @aws/kinesis@.
