---
title: Pulsar rule
meta_description: "Ably allows you to send data to Pulsar based on message, channel lifecycle, channel occupancy, and presence events."
meta_keywords: "Pulsar, integrations, events, serverless"
languages:
  - none
redirect_from:
  - /general/firehose/pulsar-rule
---

You can use a Pulsar rule if you want to send "data":/general/firehose#data-sources such as messages, occupancy, lifecycle and presence events from Ably to Pulsar.

h2(#development-status). Development status

This feature is "Enterprise only":https://ably.com/pricing, and currently in Preview.

h2(#creating-pulsar-rule). Creating a Pulsar rule

There are two ways to create a Pulsar rule:

* Using the "Ably Dashboard":https://ably.com/dashboard.
* Using the "Control API":/account/control-api.

h3(#creating-rule-dashboard). Creating a Pulsar rule in the dashboard

To create a rule in your "dashboard":https://ably.com/dashboard#58:

* Login and select the application you wish to integrate with Pulsar.
* Click the *Integrations* tab.
* Click the *+ New Integration Rule* button.
* Choose Firehose.
* Choose Pulsar.
* Configure the settings applicable to your use case and your Pulsar installation.
* Click *Create* to create the rule.

h4(#general). Pulsar general rule settings

The following explains the Pulsar general rule settings:

|_. Section         |_. Purpose                                                                                                     |
|Source             |Defines the type of event to deliver.                                                                          |
|Channel Filter     |Allows filtering of the rule based on a regular expression matching the channel name.                          |
|Encoding           |Selects a setting for encoding the payload.                                                                    |
|Enveloped          |When checked, wraps payloads with additional metadata. Uncheck for raw payloads.                               |

h4(#specific). Pulsar-specific settings

The following explains the Pulsar-specific settings:

|_. Section               |_. Purpose                                                                                              |
|Routing key              |An optional value to use as the `partitionKey` on messages published to Pulsar.                         |
|Topic                    |Defines the Pulsar topic to publish messages to. Must be in the format `tenant/namespace/topic_name`.   |
|Service URL              |Specifies the Pulsar cluster URL in the format `pulsar://host:port` or `pulsar+ssl://host:port`.        |
|JWT Token                |Used for authentication with JWT tokens. Only JWT token authentication is supported.                    |
|TLS trust certificates   |Allows for specifying a list of trusted CA certificates to verify TLS certificates presented by Pulsar. |
|Another TLS trust cert   |Option to add additional trusted certificates for verification.                                         |
|Create button            |Click to finalize and provision the Pulsar settings for the integration rule.                           |
|Cancel button            |Click to cancel the configuration and return to the previous screen.                                    |

h3(#creating-rule-control-api). Creating a Pulsar rule using Control API

See some examples of creating rules in the "rules section":/account/control-api#examples-rules of the Control API documentation. You can also refer to the "rules section":/api/control-api#tag/rules/paths/~1apps~1{app_id}~1rules/post of the Control API Reference for information on creating a Pulsar rule. You will need to select a @ruleType@ of @pulsar@.
