---
title: Amazon SQS rule
meta_description: "Ably allows you to send data to SQS based on message, channel lifecycle, channel occupancy, and presence events."
meta_keywords: "SQS, integrations, events, serverless"
languages:
  - none
redirect_from:
  - /general/firehose/sqs-rule
---

You can use a SQS rule to send "data":/general/firehose#data-sources such as messages, occupancy, lifecycle and presence events from Ably to SQS.

h2(#creating-sqs-rule). Creating a SQS rule

There are two ways to create a SQS rule:

* Using the "Ably Dashboard":https://ably.com/dashboard.
* Using the "Control API":/account/control-api.

h3(#creating-rule-dashboard). Creating a SQS rule in the dashboard

To create a rule in your "dashboard":https://ably.com/dashboard#58:

* Login and select the application you wish to integrate with SQS.
* Click the *Integrations* tab.
* Click the *+ New Integration Rule* button.
* Choose Firehose.
* Choose AWS SQS.
* Configure the settings applicable to your use case and your SQS installation.
* Click *Create* to create the rule.

h4(#general). SQS general rule settings

The following explains the SQS general rule settings:

|_. Section                |_. Purpose                                                                                    |
|URL                       |Specifies the HTTPS URL for the SQS queue, including credentials, region, and stream name.    |
|AWS region                |Defines the AWS region associated with the SQS queue.                                         |
|AWS authentication scheme |Allows selection of the authentication method: AWS credentials or ARN of an assumable role.   |
|AWS credentials           |Enter AWS credentials in `key:value` format for authentication.                               |

h4(#specific). SQS-specific settings

The following explains the SQS-specific settings:

|_. Section         |_. Purpose                                                                                                 |
|Source             |Defines the type of event to deliver, such as Message, Presence, Channel Lifecycle, or Channel Occupancy.  |
|Channel filter     |Allows filtering of the rule based on a regular expression matching the channel name.                      |
|Encoding           |Selects a setting for encoding the payload.                                                                |
|Enveloped          |When checked, wraps payloads with additional metadata. Uncheck for raw payloads.                           |
|Create button      |Click to save and apply the rule settings.                                                                 |
|Cancel button      |Click to cancel the configuration and return to the previous screen.                                       |



h3(#creating-rule-control-api). Creating a SQS rule using Control API

See some examples of creating rules in the "rules section":/account/control-api#examples of the Control API documentation. You can also refer to the "rule section":/api/control-api#tag/rules/paths/~1apps~1{app_id}~1rules/post of the Control API Reference for information on creating a SQS rule. You will need to select a @ruleType@ of @aws/sqs@.
