---
title: Protocols
meta_description: "Clients can use the Ably network protocol adapters. This is especially useful where an Ably SDK is not available for your language of choice, or where platform resource constraints prohibit use of an SDK."
redirect_from:
  - /protocol-adapters
---

Ably SDKs are the recommended method for connecting to Ably because they offer support for a comprehensive set of Ably features, such as automatic "connection management":/connect, "authentication token renewal":/auth/token and "presence":/presence-occupancy.

Protocol adapters offer an alternative method for connecting to Ably. The advantage to protocol adapters is that they require fewer resources in terms of memory and network overhead such as in smaller footprint devices, or on a platform where an Ably SDK isn't available such as an Arduino-based IoT wearable. The potential drawback to consider when evaluating protocol adapters is that they do not support the full set of Ably features, for example the MQTT protocol adapter does not support presence, and the SSE protocol adapter does not support automatic token renewal.

A full list of Ably SDKs can be found on the "SDK page":/sdks.

h2(#available-adapters). Available Protocol Adapters

Ably supports multiple protocols in addition to the native WebSockets-based one:

* "MQTT":#mqtt
* "SSE":#sse
* "AMQP":#amqp
* "STOMP":#stomp
* "Pusher":#pusher
* "PubNub":#pubnub

h3(#mqtt). MQTT

MQTT (MQ Telemetry Transport) is a publish/subscribe, lightweight messaging protocol designed for constrained devices and low-bandwidth networks. One of the major uses of MQTT is with IoT (Internet of Things), where these principles are key to having effective communication between various devices.

MQTT can also be used with Ably as a basic event broker or if we don’t have an SDK for your target platform. However, without an SDK you don’t get access to the full range of platform features and data guarantees.

Read more in the "MQTT section":/protocols/mqtt.

h3(#sse). SSE

SSE is a push technology commonly used to send unidirectional message updates or continuous data streams to a browser client. SSE aims to enhance native, cross-browser server-to-client streaming through a JavaScript API called EventSource, standardized as part of HTML5 by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C).

The Ably SSE and raw HTTP streaming API provides a way to get a realtime stream of events from Ably in circumstances where using a full Ably Realtime SDK, or even an MQTT library, is impractical.

Read more in the "SSE section":/protocols/sse.

h3(#amqp). AMQP

The AMQP protocol provides a rich set of functionality to amongst other things bind to exchanges, provision queues and configure routing. The functionality exists so that queues can be dynamically provisioned by clients and messages can be routed to these queues as required.

Read more in the "queues section":/integrations/queues.

h3(#stomp). STOMP

STOMP is a simple text-based messaging protocol, typically used for communication between message brokers. It provides an interoperable wire format so that STOMP clients can communicate with any message broker that supports the STOMP protocol and as such is a good fit for use with Ably queues.

Read more in the "queues section":/integrations/queues.

h3(#pusher). Pusher

Ably is the only cloud vendor that supports the Pusher protocol. It’s simple to migrate to Ably, or use Ably as a failover for Pusher in hours instead of months.

Seamlessly migrate from Pusher by connecting your existing clients to the Ably network with practically zero changes to your code.

Read more in the "Pusher Adapter section":/protocols/pusher.

h3(#pubnub). PubNub

Ably is the only cloud vendor that supports the PubNub protocol. It’s simple to migrate to Ably, or improve resilience with failover options in hours instead of months.

Seamlessly migrate from PubNub by connecting to the Ably network using the PubNub protocol.

Read more in the "PubNub Adapter section":/protocols/pubnub.
