---
title: Push Notifications - Admin
section: general
index: 43
hide_from_nav: true
languages:
  - javascript
  - nodejs
  - ruby
  - php
  - python
  - swift
  - objc
  - java
  - android
jump_to:
  Help with:
    - Push Admin API Overview
  API reference:
    - publish#publish
    - DeviceRegistrations#device-registrations-object
    - PushChannelSubscriptions#push-channel-subscriptions
  Types:
    - Related Types#related-types
---

The client libraries provide a Push Admin API that is intended to be used on a customer's servers to perform all the management tasks relating to registering devices, managing push device subscriptions and delivering push notifications directly to devices or devices associated with a client identifier.

The push admin API is accessible via the @push@ attribute of the realtime client. For example to publish a push notification directly to a device, you would access the "@publish@":#publish method as follows:

```[jsall]
var rest = new Ably.Rest({ key: apiKey });
rest.push.admin.publish(recipient, data);
```
```[ruby]
rest = Ably::Rest.new(key: api_key)
result = rest.push.admin.publish(recipient, data)
```
```[python]
rest = AblyRest('{{API_KEY}}')
result = rest.push.admin.publish(recipient, data)
if result.status_code == 204:
  print 'Push notification published'
```
```[php]
$rest = new Ably\AblyRest('{{API_KEY}}');
result = $rest->push->admin->publish( $recipient, $data );
if($res['info']['http_code'] == 204 );
  echo 'Push notification published';
else
  echo 'Failed to publish push notification';
```
```[swift]
let rest = ARTRest(key: "{{API_KEY}}")
rest.push.admin.publish(recipient, data: ["data": ["foo": "bar"]])
```
```[java,android]
AblyRest rest = new AblyRest("{{API_KEY}}");
rest.push.admin.publishAsync(recipient, data);
```

The push admin API offers three key features:

* "@publish@":#publish for "direct publishing to devices and groups of identified devices":/general/push/publish#direct-publishing
* "@deviceRegistrations@":#device-registrations for registering, updating, listing and deregistering push devices
* "@channelSubscriptions@":#channel-subscriptions for subscribing, listing and unsubscribing individual devices or groups of identified devices to push notifications published on channels

h2(#access-control). Push admin access control and device authentication

Operations using the push admin API, as with all our other APIs, require specific permissions as part of the credentials of a client. The push admin API has two modes of authorization:

* access using the "@push-admin@":/general/push/admin permission. A client whose credentials contain the @push-admin@ permission has full access to the push admin API, and can manage registrations and subscriptions for all devices;

* access using the @push-subscribe@ permission. A client with @push-subscribe@ is a push target device, and it can manage its registration and any subscription for itself; it is not able to manage push registrations or channel subscriptions for any other device. The credentials presented, as well as containing the @push-subscribe@ permission, must also authenticate the device itself.

Every push target device has a @deviceId@ and also has device credentials, which are used as the basis for device authentication. When using the push admin API, a device can authenticate itself in two ways:

* by using an "Ably token":/core-features/authentication#token-authentication that contains its @deviceId@;

* by using a normal "Ably key":/core-features/authentication#basic-authentication or "Ably Token":/core-features/authentication#token-authentication but additionally including a @deviceIdentityToken@ - a credential created at registration time that is used to assert the device's identity - in a header in the request.

Management of device credentials is performed by the client library, so unless the push admin API is being accessed directly using HTTP, the client application does not need to worry about managing device credentials.

h1. API reference

inline-toc.
  Methods:
    - publish()#publish
  Properties:
    - deviceRegistrations#device-registrations
    - channelSubscriptions#channel-subscriptions
  DeviceRegistrations:
    - get()#device-get-id
    - list(params)#device-list
    - save(DeviceDetails)#device-save
    - remove()#device-remove-id
    - removeWhere(params)#device-remove-where
  PushChannelSubscriptions:
    - get(PushChannelSubscription)#push-channel-sub-get
    - list(params)#push-channel-sub-list
    - listChannels(params)#push-channel-sub-list-channels
    - save(PushChannelSubscription)#push-channel-sub-save
    - remove(PushChannelSubscription)#push-channel-sub-remove
    - removeWhere(params)#push-channel-sub-remove-where
  Related types:
    - DeviceDetails#device-details
    - PushChannelSubscription#push-channel-subscription

h2(#push-admin). Push Admin object

This object is accessible through @client.push.admin@ and provides:

h3. Methods

h6(#publish).
  default: publish

bq(definition).
  default: publish(Object recipient, Object data, callback("ErrorInfo":/realtime/types#error-info err))
  ruby:  "Deferrable":/realtime/types#deferrable publish(Hash recipient, Hash data) -> yield
  python: publish(recipient=Object, data=Object)
  php: publish(Hash recipient, Hash data)
  swift,objc: publish(recipient: ARTPushRecipient, data: AnyObject?, callback: (("ARTErrorInfo":/realtime/types#error-info?) -> Void)?)
  java,android: void publish(String recipient, Object data, "CompletionListener":#completion-listener listener)

Publishes a push notification directly to a device or group of devices sharing a "client identifier":/core-features/authentication#identified-clients. See the "push notification direct publishing documentation":/general/push/publish#direct-publishing for more information.

h4. Parameters

- recipient := <span lang="default">an object</span><span lang="ruby">a Hash</span> containing the push recipient details. See the "push notification publish REST API documentation":/rest-api#push-publish for details on the supported recipient fields
- data := <span lang="default">an object</span><span lang="ruby">a Hash</span> containing the push notification data. See the "push admin payload structure":/general/push/publish#payload-structure for details on the supported push payload fields

- <div lang="jsall">callback</div> := a function of the form: @function(err)@
- <div lang="ruby">&block</div> := yielded upon success
- <div lang="java,android">listener</div> := Listener to be notified on completion<br>__Type: "@CompletionListener@":#completion-listener__
- <div lang="objc,swift">callback</div> := called upon publishing the message, or with an error

blang[jsall,swift,objc].
  h4. Callback result

  The callback is called upon success or failure to publish the push notification. When this operation fails, @err@ contains an "@ErrorInfo@":/realtime/types#error-info object with the failure reason.

blang[ruby].
  h4. Returns

  A "@Deferrable@":/realtime/types#deferrable object is returned from the method.

  On success, the registered success blocks for the "@Deferrable@":/realtime/types#deferrable and any block provided to the method are yielded to.

  Failure to publish the push notification will trigger the @errback@ callback of the "@Deferrable@":/realtime/types#deferrable with an "@ErrorInfo@":/realtime/types#error-info object with the failure reason.

blang[java].
  h4. Listener result

  On successful publish of the message, the @onSuccess@ method of the "CompletionListener":#completion-listener is called. On failure to publish the message, the @onError@ method is called with an "@ErrorInfo@":#error-info argument describing the failure reason.

h2(#properties).
  default: Push Admin Properties
  ruby: Push::Admin Properties

The push admin object exposes the following public <span lang="default">properties</span><span lang="ruby">attributes</span><span lang="java">members</span>:

h6(#device-registrations).
  default: deviceRegistrations
  ruby,python: device_registrations

The returned "@DeviceRegistrations@":#device-registrations-object object provides functionality for registering, updating, listing and deregistering push devices.

h6(#channel-subscriptions).
  default: channelSubscriptions
  ruby,python: channel_subscriptions

The returned "@PushChannelSubscriptions@":#push-channel-subscriptions object provides functionality for subscribing, listing and unsubscribing individual devices or groups of "identified devices":/core-features/authentication#identified-clients to push notifications published on channels.

h2(#device-registrations-object). DeviceRegistrations object

This object is accessible through <span lang="default">@client.push.admin.deviceRegistrations@</span><span lang="ruby">@client.push.admin.device_registrations@</span> and provides an API to register new push notification devices, update existing devices, deregister old devices, and retrieve or list devices registered to an app.

h3. Methods

h6(#device-get).
  default: get

bq(definition#device-get-id).
  default: get(String deviceId, callback("ErrorInfo":/realtime/types#error-info err, "DeviceDetails":#device-details device))
  ruby:    "Deferrable":/realtime/types#deferrable get(String deviceId) -> yields "DeviceDetails":#device-details
  python: "DeviceDetails":#device-details get(device_id=String)
  php: "DeviceDetails":#device-details get(String deviceId)
  swift,objc: get(deviceId: ArtDeviceId, callback: ((ARTDeviceDetails?, ARTErrorInfo?) -> Void)
  java,android: "DeviceDetails":#device-details get(String deviceId)

bq(definition#device-get-id-async).
  java,android: getAsync(String deviceId, Callback<DeviceDetails> callback)

bq(definition#device-get-device).
  default: get("DeviceDetails":#device-details device, callback("ErrorInfo":/realtime/types#error-info err, "DeviceDetails":#device-details device))
  ruby:    "Deferrable":/realtime/types#deferrable get("DeviceDetails":#device-details device) -> yields "DeviceDetails":#device-details

Obtain the @DeviceDetails@ for a device registered for receiving push registrations matching the @deviceId@ argument, or the @id@ attribute of the provided @DeviceDetails@ object. Requires @push-admin@ permission or @push-subscribe@ permission together with device authentication matching the requested @deviceId@.

h4. Parameters

- deviceId := the unique device ID String for the requested device
- device := a "@DeviceDetails@":#device-details object containing at a minimum the @deviceId@ of the requested device

- <div lang="jsall">callback</div> := is a function of the form: @function(err, device)@
- <div lang="ruby">&block</div> := yields a @DeviceDetails@ object upon success

blang[jsall,swift,objc].
  h4. Callback result

  On success, @device@ contains the device registered for push notifications as a "@DeviceDetails@":#device-details object.

  On failure to retrieve the device, @err@ contains an "@ErrorInfo@":/realtime/types#error-info object with the failure reason.

blang[ruby].
  h4. Returns

  A "@Deferrable@":/realtime/types#deferrable object is returned from the method.

  On success, the registered success blocks for the "@Deferrable@":/realtime/types#deferrable and any block provided to the method yield the device registered for push notifications as a "@DeviceDetails@":#device-details object.

  Failure to retrieve the device will trigger the @errback@ callbacks of the "@Deferrable@":/realtime/types#deferrable with an "@ErrorInfo@":/realtime/types#error-info object with the failure reason.

blang[java].
  h4. Listener result

  On successful publish of the message, the @onSuccess@ method of the "CompletionListener":#completion-listener is called. On failure to get the device, the @onError@ method is called with an "@ErrorInfo@":#error-info argument describing the failure reason.

h6(#device-list).
  default: list

bq(definition).
  default: list(Object params, callback("ErrorInfo":/realtime/types#error-info err, "PaginatedResult":#paginated-result<"DeviceDetails":#device-details device> resultPage))
  ruby:    "Deferrable":/realtime/types#deferrable list(Hash params) -> yields "PaginatedResult":#paginated-result<"DeviceDetails":#device-details>
  python: "PaginatedResult":#paginated-result list(params=Object)
  php: "PaginatedResult":#paginated-result list(Hash params)
  swift,objc: list(params: NSDictionary *, callback: (("ARTPaginatedResult":#paginated-result?, ARTErrorInfo?) -> Void)
  java,android: "PaginatedResult":#paginated-result list(Param[] params)

Retrieve all devices matching the params filter as a paginated list of "@DeviceDetails@":#device-details objects. Requires @push-admin@ permission.

h4. Parameters

- <span lang="default">params</span><span lang="java">"Param":#param[] params</span> := an object containing the query parameters as key value pairs as specified below.

- <div lang="jsall">callback</div> := is a function of the form: @function(err, resultPage)@
- <div lang="ruby">&block</div> := yields a @PaginatedResult<DeviceDetails>@ object
error

h4. @params@ properties

- <span lang="default">clientId</span><span lang="ruby">:client_id</span> := optional filter to restrict to devices associated with that client identifier<br>__Type: @String@__
- <span lang="default">deviceId</span><span lang="ruby">:device_id</span> := optional filter to restrict to devices associated with that device identifier<br>__Type: @String@__
- <span lang="default">limit</span><span lang="ruby">:limit</span> := _100_ maximum number of devices per page to retrieve, up to 1,000<br>__Type: @Integer@__

blang[jsall,objc,swift].
  h4. Callback result

  On success, @resultPage@ contains a "@PaginatedResult@":/realtime/types#paginated-result encapsulating an array of "@DeviceDetails@":#device-details objects corresponding to the current page of results. "@PaginatedResult@":/realtime/types#paginated-result supports pagination using "@next()@":/realtime/types#paginated-result and "@first()@":/realtime/types#paginated-result methods.

  On failure to retrieve the devices, @err@ contains an "@ErrorInfo@":/realtime/types#error-info object with the failure reason.

blang[ruby].
  h4. Returns

  A "@Deferrable@":/realtime/types#deferrable object is returned from the method.

  On success, the registered success blocks for the "@Deferrable@":/realtime/types#deferrable and any block provided to the method yield a "PaginatedResult":/realtime/types#paginated-result that encapsulates an array of "@DeviceDetails@":#device-details corresponding to the current page of results. "@PaginatedResult@":/realtime/types#paginated-result supports pagination using "@next()@":/realtime/types#paginated-result and "@first()@":/realtime/types#paginated-result methods.

  Failure to retrieve the devices will trigger the @errback@ callbacks of the "@Deferrable@":/realtime/types#deferrable with an "@ErrorInfo@":/realtime/types#error-info object with the failure reason.

h6(#device-save).
  default: save

bq(definition).
  default: save("DeviceDetails":#device-details device, callback("ErrorInfo":/realtime/types#error-info err, "DeviceDetails":#device-details device))
  ruby:    "Deferrable":/realtime/types#deferrable save("DeviceDetails":#device-details device) -> yields "DeviceDetails":#device-details
  python: "DeviceDetails":#device-details save("DeviceDetails":#device-details device_details)
  php: "DeviceDetails":#device-details save("DeviceDetails":#device-details deviceDetails)
  swift,objc: save(deviceDetails: "DeviceDetails":#device-details, callback: (("DeviceDetails":#device-details?, ARTErrorInfo?) -> Void)
  java,android: "DeviceDetails":#device-details save("DeviceDetails":#device-details deviceDetails)

Register a new @DeviceDetails@ object, or update an existing @DeviceDetails@ object with the Ably service. Requires @push-admin@ permission or @push-subscribe@ permission together with device authentication matching the requested @deviceId@.

h4. Parameters

- device := a "@DeviceDetails@":#device-details object

- <div lang="jsall">callback</div> := is a function of the form: @function(err, device)@
- <div lang="ruby">&block</div> := yields the new @DeviceDetails@ object upon success

blang[jsall,swift,objc].
  h4. Callback result

  On success, @device@ contains the newly registered or updated device as a "@DeviceDetails@":#device-details object.

  On failure to create or update the device, @err@ contains an "@ErrorInfo@":/realtime/types#error-info object with the failure reason.

blang[ruby].
  h4. Returns

  A "@Deferrable@":/realtime/types#deferrable object is returned from the method.

  On success, the registered success blocks for the "@Deferrable@":/realtime/types#deferrable and any block provided to the method yield the newly registered or updated device as a "@DeviceDetails@":#device-details object.

  Failure to create or update the device will trigger the @errback@ callbacks of the "@Deferrable@":/realtime/types#deferrable with an "@ErrorInfo@":/realtime/types#error-info object with the failure reason.

h6(#device-remove).
  default: remove

bq(definition#device-remove-id).
  default: remove(String deviceId, callback("ErrorInfo":/realtime/types#error-info err))
  ruby:    "Deferrable":/realtime/types#deferrable remove(String deviceId)
  python: remove(String device_id)
  php: remove(String deviceId)
  swift,objc: remove(deviceDetails: "DeviceDetails":#device-details, callback: (("DeviceDetails":#device-details?, ARTErrorInfo?) -> Void)
  java,android: "DeviceDetails":#device-details save("DeviceDetails":#device-details deviceDetails)

bq(definition#device-remove-device).
  default: remove("DeviceDetails":#device-details device, callback("ErrorInfo":/realtime/types#error-info err))
  ruby:    "Deferrable":/realtime/types#deferrable remove("DeviceDetails":#device-details device) -> yield
  python: remove("DeviceDetails":#device-details device_details)
  php: remove("DeviceDetails":#device-details deviceDetails)
  swift,objc: remove(deviceDetails: "DeviceDetails":#device-details, callback: ((ARTErrorInfo?) -> Void)
  java,android: "DeviceDetails":#device-details save("DeviceDetails":#device-details deviceDetails)

Remove a device registered for receiving push registrations that matches the @deviceId@ argument, or the @id@ attribute of the provided "@DeviceDetails@":#device-details object. Requires @push-admin@ permission or @push-subscribe@ permission together with device authentication matching the requested @deviceId@.

h4. Parameters

- deviceId := the unique device ID String for the device
- device := a "@DeviceDetails@":#device-details object containing at a minimum the @deviceId@ of the device

- <div lang="jsall">callback</div> := is a function of the form: @function(err)@
- <div lang="ruby">&block</div> := yields upon success

blang[jsall,swift,objc].
  h4. Callback result

  The callback is called upon success or failure to delete the device. Note that a request to delete a device that does not exist will result in a successful operation.

  When this operation fails, @err@ contains an "@ErrorInfo@":/realtime/types#error-info object with the failure reason.

blang[ruby].
  h4. Returns

  A "@Deferrable@":/realtime/types#deferrable object is returned from the method.

  On success, the registered success blocks for the "@Deferrable@":/realtime/types#deferrable and any block provided to the method are yielded to. Note that a request to delete a device that does not exist will result in a successful operation.

  Failure to delete the device will trigger the @errback@ callbacks of the "@Deferrable@":/realtime/types#deferrable with an "@ErrorInfo@":/realtime/types#error-info object with the failure reason.

h6(#device-remove-where).
  default: removeWhere
  ruby,python: remove_where

bq(definition).
  default: removeWhere(Object params, callback("ErrorInfo":/realtime/types#error-info err))
  ruby:    "Deferrable":/realtime/types#deferrable remove_where(Hash params) -> yield
  python: remove_where(params=Object)
  php: removeWhere(Hash params)
  swift,objc: removeWhere(params: NSDictionary *, callback: (ARTErrorInfo?) -> Void)
  java,android: removeWhere(Param[] params)

Delete all devices matching the params filter. Requires @push-admin@ permission.

h4. Parameters

- <span lang="default">params</span><span lang="java">"Param":#param[] params</span> := an object containing the filter parameters as key value pairs as specified below.

- <div lang="jsall">callback</div> := is a function of the form: @function(err)@
- <div lang="ruby">&block</div> := yields upon success
error

h4. @params@ properties

- <span lang="default">clientId</span><span lang="ruby">:client_id</span> := optional filter to restrict to devices associated with that client identifier<br>__Type: @String@__
- <span lang="default">deviceId</span><span lang="ruby">:device_id</span> := optional filter to restrict to devices associated with that device identifier<br>__Type: @String@__

blang[jsall,swift,objc].
  h4. Callback result

  The callback is called upon success or failure to delete the device. Note that a request that does match any existing devices will result in a successful operation.

  When this operation fails, @err@ contains an "@ErrorInfo@":/realtime/types#error-info object with the failure reason.

blang[ruby].
  h4. Returns

  A "@Deferrable@":/realtime/types#deferrable object is returned from the method.

  On success, the registered success blocks for the "@Deferrable@":/realtime/types#deferrable and any block provided to the method are yielded to. Note that a request that does match any existing devices will result in a successful operation.

  Failure to delete the device will trigger the @errback@ callbacks of the "@Deferrable@":/realtime/types#deferrable with an "@ErrorInfo@":/realtime/types#error-info object with the failure reason.

h2(#push-channel-subscriptions). PushChannelSubscriptions object

This object is accessible through <span lang="default">@client.push.admin.channelSubscriptions@</span><span lang="ruby">@client.push.admin.channel_subscriptions@</span> and provides an API to subscribe a push notification device to a channel ensuring it receives any push notifications published in the future on that channel. Additionally, this object allows these subscriptions to be retrieved, listed, updated or removed.

h3. Methods

h6(#push-channel-sub-list).
  default: list

bq(definition).
  default: list(Object params, callback("ErrorInfo":/realtime/types#error-info err, "PaginatedResult":/realtime/types#paginated-result<"PushChannelSubscription":#push-channel-subscription> resultPage))
  ruby:    "Deferrable":/realtime/types#deferrable list(Hash params) -> yields "PaginatedResult":/realtime/types#paginated-result<"PushChannelSubscription":#push-channel-subscription>
  python: "PaginatedResult":#paginated-result list(params=Object)
  php: "PaginatedResult":#paginated-result list(Hash params)
  swift,objc: list(params: NSDictionary *, callback: (("ARTPaginatedResult":#paginated-result?, ARTErrorInfo?) -> Void)
  java,android: "PaginatedResult":#paginated-result list(Param[] params)

Retrieve all push channel subscriptions that match the provided params filter as a paginated list of "@PushChannelSubscription@":#push-channel-subscription objects. Each "@PushChannelSubscription@":#push-channel-subscription represents a device or set of devices sharing the same "client identifier":/core-features/authentication#identified-clients registered to a channel to receive push notifications.

h4. Parameters

- <span lang="default">params</span><span lang="java">"Param":#param[] params</span> := an object containing the query parameters as key value pairs as specified below.

- <div lang="jsall">callback</div> := is a function of the form: @function(err, resultPage)@
- <div lang="ruby">&block</div> := yields a @PaginatedResult<PushChannelSubscription>@ object
error

h4. @params@ properties

- <span lang="default">channel</span><span lang="ruby">:channel</span> := filter to restrict to subscriptions associated with that @channel@
- <span lang="default">clientId</span><span lang="ruby">:client_id</span> := optional filter to restrict to devices associated with that client identifier. Cannot be used with a <span lang="default">@clientId@</span><span lang="ruby">@:client_id@</span> param<br>__Type: @String@__
- <span lang="default">deviceId</span><span lang="ruby">:device_id</span> := optional filter to restrict to devices associated with that device identifier. Cannot be used with a <span lang="default">@deviceId@</span><span lang="ruby">@:device_id@</span> param<br>__Type: @String@__
- <span lang="default">limit</span><span lang="ruby">:limit</span> := _100_ maximum number of channel subscriptions per page to retrieve, up to 1,000<br>__Type: @Integer@__

blang[jsall,swift,objc].
  h4. Callback result

  On success, @resultPage@ contains a "@PaginatedResult@":/realtime/types#paginated-result encapsulating an array of "@PushChannelSubscription@":#push-channel-subscription objects corresponding to the current page of results. "@PaginatedResult@":/realtime/types#paginated-result supports pagination using "@next()@":/realtime/types#paginated-result and "@first()@":/realtime/types#paginated-result methods.

  On failure to retrieve the channel subscriptions, @err@ contains an "@ErrorInfo@":/realtime/types#error-info object which contains the failure reason.

blang[ruby].
  h4. Returns

  A "@Deferrable@":/realtime/types#deferrable object is returned from the method.

  On success, the registered success blocks for the "@Deferrable@":/realtime/types#deferrable and any block provided to the method yield a "PaginatedResult":/realtime/types#paginated-result that encapsulates an array of "@PushChannelSubscription@":#push-channel-subscription corresponding to the current page of results. "@PaginatedResult@":/realtime/types#paginated-result supports pagination using "@next()@":/realtime/types#paginated-result and "@first()@":/realtime/types#paginated-result methods.

  Failure to retrieve the channel subscriptions will trigger the @errback@ callbacks of the "@Deferrable@":/realtime/types#deferrable with an "@ErrorInfo@":/realtime/types#error-info object with the failure reason.

h6(#push-channel-sub-list-channels).
  default: listChannels
  ruby,python: list_channels

bq(definition).
  default: listChannels(Object params, callback("ErrorInfo":/realtime/types#error-info err, "PaginatedResult":/realtime/types#paginated-result<String> resultPage))
  ruby:    "Deferrable":/realtime/types#deferrable list_channels(Hash params) -> yields "PaginatedResult":/realtime/types#paginated-result<String>
  python: "PaginatedResult":#paginated-result list_channels(params=Object)
  php: "PaginatedResult":#paginated-result listChannels(Hash params)
  swift,objc: listChannels(params: NSDictionary *, callback: (("ARTPaginatedResult":#paginated-result?, ARTErrorInfo?) -> Void)
  java,android: "PaginatedResult":#paginated-result listChannels(Param[] params)

Retrieve a list of channels with at least one subscribed device as a paginated list of channel name @String@ objects. Requires @push-admin@ permission.

h4. Parameters

- <span lang="default">params</span><span lang="java">"Param":#param[] params</span> := an object containing the query parameters as key value pairs as specified below.

- <div lang="jsall">callback</div> := is a function of the form: @function(err, resultPage)@
- <div lang="ruby">&block</div> := yields a @PaginatedResult<String>@ object
error

h4. @params@ properties

- <span lang="default">limit</span><span lang="ruby">:limit</span> := _100_ maximum number of channels per page to retrieve, up to 1,000<br>__Type: @Integer@__

blang[jsall,swift,objc].
  h4. Callback result

  On success, @resultPage@ contains a "@PaginatedResult@":/realtime/types#paginated-result encapsulating an array of channel name @String@ values corresponding to the current page of results. "@PaginatedResult@":/realtime/types#paginated-result supports pagination using "@next()@":/realtime/types#paginated-result and "@first()@":/realtime/types#paginated-result methods.

  On failure to retrieve the channels, @err@ contains an "@ErrorInfo@":/realtime/types#error-info object with the failure reason.

blang[ruby].
  h4. Returns

  A "@Deferrable@":/realtime/types#deferrable object is returned from the method.

  On success, the registered success blocks for the "@Deferrable@":/realtime/types#deferrable and any block provided to the method yield a "PaginatedResult":/realtime/types#paginated-result that encapsulates an array of channel name @String@ values corresponding to the current page of results. "@PaginatedResult@":/realtime/types#paginated-result supports pagination using "@next()@":/realtime/types#paginated-result and "@first()@":/realtime/types#paginated-result methods.

  Failure to retrieve the channels will trigger the @errback@ callbacks of the "@Deferrable@":/realtime/types#deferrable with an "@ErrorInfo@":/realtime/types#error-info object with the failure reason.

h6(#push-channel-sub-save).
  default: save

bq(definition).
  default: save("PushChannelSubscription":#push-channel-subscription channelSubscription, callback("ErrorInfo":/realtime/types#error-info err, "PushChannelSubscription":#push-channel-subscription channelSubscription))
  ruby:    "Deferrable":/realtime/types#deferrable save("PushChannelSubscription":#push-channel-subscription channel_subscription) -> yields "PushChannelSubscription":#push-channel-subscription
  python: "PushChannelSubscription":#push-channel-subscription save("PushChannelSubscription":#push-channel-subscription channel_subscription)
  php: "PushChannelSubscription":#push-channel-subscription save("PushChannelSubscription":#push-channel-subscription channelSubscription)
  swift,objc: save(channelSubscription: "PushChannelSubscription":#push-channel-subscription, callback: (("PushChannelSubscription":#push-channel-subscription?, ARTErrorInfo?) -> Void)
  java,android: "PushChannelSubscription":#push-channel-subscription save("PushChannelSubscription":#push-channel-subscription channelSubscription)

Subscribe a device or group of devices sharing a "client identifier":/core-features/authentication#identified-clients for push notifications published on a channel.

h4. Parameters

- <span lang="default">channelSubscription</span><span lang="ruby,python">channel_subscription</span> := a "@PushChannelSubscription@":#push-channel-subscription object

- <div lang="jsall">callback</div> := is a function of the form: @function(err, channelSubscription)@
- <div lang="ruby">&block</div> := yields the new @PushChannelSubscription@ object upon success

blang[jsall,swift,objc].
  h4. Callback result

  On success, @channelSubscription@ contains the newly subscribed or updated push channel subscription as a "@PushChannelSubscription@":#push-channel-subscription object.

  On failure to create or update the channel subscription, @err@ contains an "@ErrorInfo@":/realtime/types#error-info object with the failure reason.

blang[ruby].
  h4. Returns

  A "@Deferrable@":/realtime/types#deferrable object is returned from the method.

  On success, the registered success blocks for the "@Deferrable@":/realtime/types#deferrable and any block provided to the method yield the newly subscribed or updated push channel subscription as a "@PushChannelSubscription@":#push-channel-subscription object.

  On failure to create or update the channel subscription will trigger the @errback@ callbacks of the "@Deferrable@":/realtime/types#deferrable with an "@ErrorInfo@":/realtime/types#error-info object with the failure reason.

h6(#push-channel-sub-remove).
  default: remove

bq(definition).
  default: remove("PushChannelSubscription":#push-channel-subscription channelSubscription, callback("ErrorInfo":/realtime/types#error-info err))
  ruby:    "Deferrable":/realtime/types#deferrable remove("PushChannelSubscription":#push-channel-subscription channel_subscription) -> yield
  python: remove("PushChannelSubscription":#push-channel-subscription channel_subscription)
  php: remove("PushChannelSubscription":#push-channel-subscription channelSubscription)
  swift,objc: remove(channelSubscription: "PushChannelSubscription":#push-channel-subscription, callback: ((ARTErrorInfo?) -> Void)
  java,android: void save("PushChannelSubscription":#push-channel-subscription channelSubscription)

Unsubscribe a device or group of devices sharing a "client identifier":/core-features/authentication#identified-clients from push notifications on a channel. Requires @push-admin@ permission or, in the case of a subscription associated with a given @deviceId@, @push-subscribe@ permission together with device authentication matching that @deviceId@.

h4. Parameters

- <span lang="default">channelSubscription</span><span lang="ruby,python">channel_subscription</span> := a "@PushChannelSubscription@":#push-channel-subscription object

- <div lang="jsall">callback</div> := is a function of the form: @function(err)@
- <div lang="ruby">&block</div> := yields upon success

blang[jsall,swift,objc].
  h4. Callback result

  The callback is called upon success or failure to unsubscribe. Note that a request to unsubscribe or remove a subscription that does not exist will result in a successful operation.

  When this operation fails, @err@ contains an "@ErrorInfo@":/realtime/types#error-info object with the failure reason.

blang[ruby].
  h4. Returns

  A "@Deferrable@":/realtime/types#deferrable object is returned from the method.

  On success, the registered success blocks for the "@Deferrable@":/realtime/types#deferrable and any block provided to the method are yielded to. Note that a request to unsubscribe or remove a subscription that does not exist will result in a successful operation.

  Failure to unsubscribe will trigger the @errback@ callbacks of the "@Deferrable@":/realtime/types#deferrable with an "@ErrorInfo@":/realtime/types#error-info object with the failure reason.

h6(#push-channel-sub-remove-where).
  default: removeWhere
  ruby,python: remove_where

bq(definition).
  default: removeWhere(Object params, callback("ErrorInfo":/realtime/types#error-info err))
  ruby:    "Deferrable":/realtime/types#deferrable remove_where(Hash params) -> yield
  python: remove_where(params=Object)
  php: removeWhere(Hash params)
  swift,objc: removeWhere(params: NSDictionary *, callback: (ARTErrorInfo?) -> Void)
  java,android: removeWhere(Param[] params)

Delete all push channel subscriptions matching the @params@ filter. Requires @push-admin@ permission.

h4. Parameters

- <span lang="default">params</span><span lang="java">"Param":#param[] params</span> := an object containing the filter parameters as key value pairs as specified below.

- <div lang="jsall">callback</div> := is a function of the form: @function(err)@
- <div lang="ruby">&block</div> := yields upon success
error

h4. @params@ properties

- <span lang="default">channel</span><span lang="ruby">:channel</span> := filter to restrict to subscriptions associated with that @channel@
- <span lang="default">clientId</span><span lang="ruby">:client_id</span> := optional filter to restrict to devices associated with that client identifier. Cannot be used with <span lang="default">@clientId@</span><span lang="ruby">@:client_id@</span> param<br>__Type: @String@__
- <span lang="default">deviceId</span><span lang="ruby">:device_id</span> := optional filter to restrict to devices associated with that device identifier. Cannot be used with <span lang="default">@deviceId@</span><span lang="ruby">@:device_id@</span> param<br>__Type: @String@__

blang[jsall,swift,objc].
  h4. Callback result

  The callback is called upon success or failure to unsubscribe. Note that a request to unsubscribe or remove a subscription that does not exist will result in a successful operation.

  When this operation fails, @err@ contains an "@ErrorInfo@":/realtime/types#error-info object with the failure reason.

blang[ruby].
  h4. Returns

  A "@Deferrable@":/realtime/types#deferrable object is returned from the method.

  On success, the registered success blocks for the "@Deferrable@":/realtime/types#deferrable and any block provided to the method are yielded to. Note that a request to unsubscribe or remove a subscription that does not exist will result in a successful operation.

  Failure to unsubscribe will trigger the @errback@ callbacks of the "@Deferrable@":/realtime/types#deferrable with an "@ErrorInfo@":#error-info object with the failure reason.

h2(#related-types). Related types

h3(#device-details).
  default: DeviceDetails
  ruby:    Ably::Models::DeviceDetails

<%= partial partial_version('types/_device_details') %>

h3(#push-channel-subscription).
  default: PushChannelSubscription
  ruby:    Ably::Models::PushChannelSubscription

<%= partial partial_version('types/_push_channel_subscription') %>
