---
title: Push Notifications - Download
section: general
index: 41
hide_from_nav: true
---

Ably's push notification service is currently in beta. As such, the client libraries currently have varying levels of support for push notifications.

Below is a table with the recent status of each library along with instructions on how to install each library. "Get in touch":https://www.ably.io/contact if a needed library is missing or you require any assistance.

|_. Library |_. Status |_. Installation instructions |
| Android | Push admin and target API complete | See "the integration branch for the push API":https://github.com/ably/ably-java/tree/integration-push |
| Go | Not scheduled for release at present | See "alternative solution":#alternative below |
| iOS | Realtime & REST API complete | Push has been supported since 1.1.0; see "releases":https://github.com/ably/ably-ios/releases |
| Java (non-Android) | Push admin API complete | See "the integration branch for the push API":https://github.com/ably/ably-java/tree/integration-push |
| Javascript | Push admin API complete <br>Web Push not yet supported | See "the integration branch for the push API":https://github.com/ably/ably-js/tree/push-activation |
| .NET | Not scheduled for release at present | See "alternative solution":#alternative below |
| Node.js | Push admin API complete | See "the integration branch for the push API":https://github.com/ably/ably-js/tree/push-activation |
| PHP | Push admin API complete | Push has been supported since 1.1.0; see "releases":https://github.com/ably/ably-php/releases |
| Python | Push admin API complete | Push has been supported since 1.1.0; see "releases":https://github.com/ably/ably-python/releases |
| Ruby | Push admin API complete | Push has been supported since 1.1.0; see "releases":https://github.com/ably/ably-ruby/releases |

h2(#alternative). How to use push notifications with an unsupported client library

As most of the functionality required to manage and publish push notifications is exposed using our "documented REST API":/rest-api, if we have not yet added push support to a client library you need, you have two options available to start using push notifications now anyway:

* Use our client library "request method":/rest/usage#request that is provided as a convenience for developers who wish to use bleeding-edge REST API functionality without having to handle authentication, paging, fallback hosts, MsgPack and JSON support, etc. themselves. Refer to "REST API documentation":/rest-api for a list of push-related endpoints
* Access the "REST API directly":/rest-api from your apps or servers

For example, in the Javascript / Node.js library you can obtain a "list of all registered devices":/rest-api#list-device-registrations using the "request method":/rest/usage#request as follows:

```[javascript]
var ably = new Ably.Rest({ key: key });
ably.request(
  'get',
  'push/deviceRegistrations',
  {limit: 100},
  null,
  null,
  function(err, response) {
    if(err) {
      console.log('An error occurred; err = ' + err.toString());
    } else {
      console.log('Success! status code was ' + response.statusCode);
      console.log(response.items.length + ' devices returned');
      if(response.hasNext()) {
        response.next(function(err, nextPage) {
          console.log(nextPage.items.length + ' more devices returned');
        });
      }
    }
  }
);
```

Please note that if you want to receive push notifications on a device using an Ably client library that does not yet support push notifications, then "please get in touch":https://www.ably.io/contact. Unfortunately, receiving push notifications is platform specific. As a result, adding support is far from trivial.
