---
title: Messages
section: realtime
index: 31
languages:
  - javascript
  - nodejs
  - ruby
  - java
  - swift
  - objc
  - csharp
jump_to:
  Help with:
    - Getting started#getting-started
    - Subscribing to messages#message-subscription
    - Publishing messages#message-publish
    - Retrieving message history#message-history
    - API Reference#api-reference
---

The Ably Realtime service allows for clients to send information with @messages@, which contain data the client wishes to communicate. These messages are "published":#message-publish through "channels":/realtime/channels, which other users can "subscribe":#message-subscription to in order to receive them. This scalable and resilient messaging pattern is commonly called "pub/sub":https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Publish%E2%80%93subscribe_pattern.

h2(#getting-started). Getting started

The Ably Realtime client library provides a straightforward API for "publishing":#message-publish and "subscribing":#message-subscription to messages on a "channel":/realtime/channels. If the "channel":/realtime/channels does not exist at the time the client is attached, a "channel":/realtime/channels will be created in the Ably system immediately.

```[javascript]
  var realtime = new Ably.Realtime('{{API_KEY}}');
  var channel = realtime.channels.get('{{RANDOM_CHANNEL_NAME}}');
  channel.subscribe(function(message) {
    alert('Received: ' + message.data);
  });
  channel.publish('example', 'message data');
```

```[nodejs]
  var Ably = require('ably');
  var realtime = new Ably.Realtime('{{API_KEY}}');
  var channel = realtime.channels.get('{{RANDOM_CHANNEL_NAME}}');
  channel.subscribe(function(message) {
    console.log("Received: "  message.data);
  });
  channel.publish("example", "message data");
```

```[ruby]
  realtime = Ably::Realtime.new('{{API_KEY}}')
  channel = realtime.channels.get('{{RANDOM_CHANNEL_NAME}}')
  channel.subscribe do |message|
    puts "Received: #{message.data}"
  end
  channel.publish 'example', 'message data'
```

```[java]
  AblyRealtime realtime = new AblyRealtime("{{API_KEY}}");
  Channel channel = realtime.channels.get("{{RANDOM_CHANNEL_NAME}}");
  channel.subscribe(new MessageListener() {
    @Override
    public void onMessage(Message message) {
      System.out.println("New messages arrived. " + message.name);
    }
  });
  channel.publish("example", "message data");
```

```[csharp]
  AblyRealtime realtime = new AblyRealtime("{{API_KEY}}");
  var channel = realtime.Channels.Get("{{RANDOM_CHANNEL_NAME}}");
  channel.Subscribe(message => {
    Console.WriteLine($"Message: {message.name}:{message.data} received")
  });
  channel.Publish("example", "message data");
```

```[objc]
ARTRealtime *realtime = [[ARTRealtime alloc] initWithKey:@"{{API_KEY}}"];
ARTRealtimeChannel *channel = [realtime.channels get:@"{{RANDOM_CHANNEL_NAME}}"];
[channel subscribe:^(ARTMessage *message) {
    NSLog(@"Received: %@", message.data);
}];
[channel publish:@"example" data:@"message data"];
```

```[swift]
let realtime = ARTRealtime(key: "{{API_KEY}}")
let channel = realtime.channels.get("{{RANDOM_CHANNEL_NAME}}")
channel.subscribe { message in
    print("Received: \(message.data)")
}
channel.publish("example", data: "message data")
```

If you would prefer to just dive into code and see some examples of how to use messages, then we recommend you take a look at our "Realtime tutorials":/tutorials.

h2(#messages). Messages

Each message published has an optional event @name@ <span lang="default">property</span><span lang="java">member</span><span lang="ruby">attribute</span> and a @data@ <span lang="default">property</span><span lang="java">member</span><span lang="ruby">attribute</span> carrying the payload of the message. Various primitive and object types are defined, portable and supported in all clients, enabling clients to be interoperable despite being hosted in different languages or environments.

The supported payload types are Strings, JSON objects and arrays, buffers containing arbitrary binary data, and Null objects. Client libraries detect the supplied message payload and encode the message appropriately.

h3(#message-subscription). Subscribing to messages

The @name@ <span lang="default">property</span><span lang="java">member</span><span lang="ruby">attribute</span> of published messages does not affect the distribution of a channel message to clients but may be used as a (purely client-side) subscription filter, allowing a client to register a listener that only sees a subset of the messages received on the channel. When subscribing, a message listener can subscribe to see all messages on the channel or only a subset whose name matches a given @name@ string.

The client can choose whether or not to receive messages that they themselves publish using <span lang="default">"@ClientOptions#echoMessages@":/realtime/usage/#client-options</span><span lang="ruby">"@ClientOptions#echo_messages@":/realtime/usage/#client-options</span>.

<div lang="jsall,objc,swift">
A client can subscribe to all messages on a channel by passing a listener function to the @subscribe@ method. The listener is passed a "@Message@":/api/realtime-sdk/types#message object for each message received.
</div><div lang="java">
A client can register for messages on a channel by implementing "MessageListener":/api/realtime-sdk/types#message-listener and calling the @subscribe(MessageListener listener)@ or @subscribe(String name, MessageListener listener)@ method. The listener is passed an array of one or more "@Message@":/api/realtime-sdk/types#message objects when messages are received.
</div><div lang="ruby">
A client can subscribe to all messages on a channel by passing a block to the @subscribe@ method. The block is passed a "@Message@":/api/realtime-sdk/types#message object for each message are received.
</div><div lang="csharp">
A client can subscribe to all messages on a channel by passing a lambda expression to the @Subscribe@ method. The lambda is passed a "@Message@":/api/realtime-sdk/types#message object for each message are received.
</div>

bc[jsall]. channel.subscribe(function(message) {
  console.log('message received for event ' + message.name);
  console.log('message data:' + message.data);
});

bc[java]. channel.subscribe(new MessageListener() {
  @Override
  public void onMessage(Message message) {
    System.out.println("Message received: " + message.data);
  }
});

bc[csharp]. channel.Subscribe(message =>
{
    Console.WriteLine($"message received for event {message.Name}");
    Console.WriteLine($"message data: {message.Data}");
});

bc[ruby]. channel.subscribe do |message|
  puts "message received for event #{message.name}"
  puts "message data: #{message.data}"
end

bc[objc]. [channel subscribe:^(ARTMessage *message) {
    NSLog(@"message received for event %@", message.name);
    NSLog(@"message data: %@", message.data);
}];

bc[swift]. channel.subscribe { message in
    print("message received for event \(message.name)")
    print("message data: \(message.data)")
}

Alternatively a listener may be registered so that it is called only for messages having a specific event name.

bc[jsall]. channel.subscribe('myEvent', function(message) {
  console.log('message received for event ' + message.name);
  console.log('message data:' + message.data);
});

bc[java]. channel.subscribe("myEvent", new MessageListener() {
  @Override
  public void onMessage(Message message) {
    System.out.println("Message received: " + message.data);
  }
});

bc[csharp]. channel.Subscribe("myEvent", message =>
{
    Console.WriteLine($"message received for event {message.Name}");
    Console.WriteLine($"message data: {message.Data}");
});

bc[ruby]. channel.subscribe('myEvent') do |message|
  puts "message received for event #{message.name}"
  puts "message data: #{message.data}"
end

bc[swift]. channel.subscribe("myEvent") { message in
    print("message received for event \(message.name)")
    print("message data: \(message.data)")
}

bc[objc]. [channel subscribe:@"myEvent" callback:^(ARTMessage *message) {
    NSLog(@"message received for event %@", message.name);
    NSLog(@"message data: %@", message.data);
}];

Previously registered listeners can be removed individually or all together.

```[jsall]
/* remove the listener registered for a single event */
channel.unsubscribe('myEvent', myListener);

/* remove the listener registered for all events */
channel.unsubscribe(myListener);
```

```[java]
/* remove a single listener */
channel.unsubscribe(myListener);

/* remove the listener registered for all events */
channel.unsubscribe("myEvent", myListener);
```

```[csharp]
/* remove a single listener */
channel.Unsubscribe(myHandler);

/* remove the listener registered for all events */
channel.Unsubscribe("myEvent", myHandler);
```

```[ruby]
# remove the listener proc registered for a single event
channel.unsubscribe("myEvent", &my_proc)

# remove the listener proc registered for all events
channel.unsubscribe(&my_proc)
```

```[objc]
// remove the listener registered for a single event
[channel unsubscribe:@"myEvent" listener:listener];

// remove the listener registered for all events
[channel unsubscribe:listener];
```

```[swift]
// remove the listener registered for a single event
channel.unsubscribe("myEvent", listener: listener)

// remove the listener registered for all events
channel.unsubscribe(listener)
```

h3(#message-publish). Publishing messages

Channels expose a "<span lang="default">@publish@</span><span lang="csharp">@Publish@</span>":/api/realtime-sdk/channels#publish method whereby a client can "publish":/api/realtime-sdk/channels#publish  either a single message or an array of messages to a channel. A listener optionally passed in to the <span lang="default">@publish@</span><span lang="csharp">@Publish@</span> method enables the client to know whether or not the operation succeeded.

bc[jsall]. channel.publish('event', 'This is my payload', function(err) {
  if(err) {
    console.log('Unable to publish message; err = ' + err.message);
  } else {
    console.log('Message successfully sent');
  }
});

bc[ruby]. deferrable = channel.publish('event', 'This is my payload') do
  puts 'Messages successfully sent'
end
deferrable.errback do |err|
  puts "Unable to publish messages; err = #{err}"
end

bc[java]. channel.publish("event", "This is my payload", new CompletionListener() {
  @Override
  public void onError(ErrorInfo reason) {
    System.out.println("Unable to publish message; err = " + reason.message);
  }
  @Override
  public void onSuccess() {
    System.out.println("Message successfully sent");
  }
});

bc[csharp]. channel.Publish("event", "payload", (success, error) =>
{
  if (error != null) {
    Console.WriteLine("Unable to publish message. Reason: " + error.Message);
  } else {
    Console.WriteLine("Message published successfully");
  }
});

bc[objc]. [channel publish:@"event" data:@"This is my payload" callback:^(ARTErrorInfo *error) {
  if (error) {
    NSLog(@"Unable to publish message; err = %@", error.message);
  } else {
    NSLog(@"Message successfully sent");
  }
}];

bc[swift]. channel.publish("event", data: "This is my payload") { error in
  if let error = error {
    print("Unable to publish message; err = \(error.message)")
  } else {
    print("Message successfully sent")
  }
}

blang[csharp].
  Channels also expose an async version @PublishAsync@ of the @Publish@ call which resumes execution once the message is confirmed received. It is purely for convenience.

  ```[csharp]
    Result result = await channel.PublishAsync("event", "payload");
    if(result.IsFailure) {
      Console.WriteLine("Unable to publish message. Reason: " + result.Error.Message);
    } else {
      Console.WriteLine("Message published successfully");
    }
  ```

h4(#batch-publish). Batch publishing

It is common for a single message to be intended for multiple channels. With a realtime connection, you can effectively send a message to multiple channels at once by allowing multiple concurrent publish operations. If you wish to send a message to multiple channels within a single operation, you can make use of the "REST batch API":/rest-api/beta#batch.

h3(#message-history). Retrieving message history

Channels expose a "<span lang="default">@history@</span><span lang="csharp">@History@</span>":/api/realtime-sdk/history#channel-history method providing a means for clients to obtain messages previously sent on the channel. Channel history can be used to return continuous message history up to the exact point a realtime channel was attached.

History provides access to instantaneous "live" history as well as the longer term persisted history for attached channels. If "persisted history":/storage-history/storage is enabled for the channel, then messages will "typically be stored for 24 - 72 hours":https://faqs.ably.com/how-long-are-messages-stored-for. If persisted history is not enabled, Ably retains the last two minutes of message history in memory.

The following example retrieves the first two pages of historical messages published up until the point the channel was attached.

bc[jsall]. channel.attach(function() {
  channel.history({ untilAttach: true }, function(err, resultPage) {
    if(err) {
      console.log('Unable to get channel history; err = ' + err.message);
    } else {
      console.log(resultPage.items.length + ' messages received in first page');
      if(resultPage.hasNext()) {
        resultPage.next(function(err, nextPage) { ... });
      }
    }
  });
});

bc[java]. Param[] options = new Param[]{ new Param("untilAttach", "true") };
PaginatedResult<Message> resultPage = channel.history(options);
System.out.println(resultPage.items().length + " messages received in first page");
if(resultPage.hasNext()) {
  PaginatedResult<Message> nextPage = resultPage.next();
  System.out.println(nextPage.items().length + " messages received in second page");
}

bc[csharp]. PaginatedResult<Message> history = await channel.HistoryAsync(untilAttach: true);
Console.WriteLine($"{history.Items.Count} messages received in the first page");
if (history.HasNext)
{
  PaginatedResult<Message> nextPage = await history.NextAsync();
  Console.WriteLine($"{nextPage.Items.Count} messages received in the second page");
}

bc[ruby]. channel.attach do
  channel.history(until_attach: true) do |result_page|
    puts "#{result_page.items.length} messages received in first page"
    if result_page.has_next?
      result_page.next { |next_page| ... }
    end
  end
end

bc[objc]. [channel attach:^(ARTErrorInfo *error) {
    ARTRealtimeHistoryQuery *query = [[ARTRealtimeHistoryQuery alloc] init];
    query.untilAttach = true;
    [channel history:query callback:^(ARTPaginatedResult<ARTMessage *> *resultPage, ARTErrorInfo *error) {
        NSLog(@"%lu messages received in first page", (unsigned long)[resultPage.items count]);
        if (resultPage.hasNext) {
            [resultPage next:^(ARTPaginatedResult<ARTMessage *> *nextPage, ARTErrorInfo *error) {
                // ...
            }];
        }
    } error:nil];
}];

bc[swift]. channel.attach { error in
    let query = ARTRealtimeHistoryQuery()
    query.untilAttach = true
    try! channel.history(query) { resultPage, error in
        let resultPage = resultPage!
        print("\(resultPage.items.count) messages received in first page")
        if resultPage.hasNext {
            resultPage.next { nextPage, error in
                // ...
            }
        }
    }
}

See the "history documentation":/storage-history/history for further details of the supported query parameters.

h2(#api-reference). API Reference

View the "Messages API Reference":/api/realtime-sdk/messages.
