---
title: Zapier
meta_description: "Ably allows you to trigger Zapier based on message, channel lifecycle, channel occupancy, and presence events."
meta_keywords: "Zapier, integrations, events, serverless"
languages:
  - none
redirect_from:
  - /general/events/zapier
  - /content//webhooks/zapier
  - /general/webhooks/zapier
---

As part of "Webhooks":/general/webhooks, it is possible to integrate with various systems via webhooks.

"Zapier":https://zapier.com provides simple integrations into thousands of different services. It's possible to plug into this using their "webhooks":https://zapier.com/page/webhooks feature.

h2(#tutorials). Tutorials & Examples

If you would like to just dive in and see an example of this being implemented, then take a look at our "Zapier tutorial":/tutorials/reactor-event-zapier.

For more details on the specifics of how webhooks and our integrations work, check out our "Webhooks documentation":/general/webhooks.

h2(#fields). Rule fields

- URL := The URL of your Zapier endpoint
- Custom headers := Optionally allows you to provide a set of headers that will be included in all HTTP POST requests. You must use format @"XCustom-Header-1:value1"@ for each header you add
- "Source":/general/webhooks#sources := Choose which of @channel.message@, @channel.presence@, @channel.lifecycle@, or @channel.occupancy@ events on channels should activate this event rule.
- "Request Mode":/general/webhooks#batching := This will either be in @Single Request@ mode or @Batch Request@ mode. "Single Request":/general/webhooks#single-request will send each event separately to the endpoint specified by the rule. "Batch Request":/general/webhooks#batch-request will send events triggered concurrently in the same request
- "Channel filter":/general/webhooks#channel-filter := An optional filter on channel name, to restrict the channels the rule applies to. Use a regular expression to match multiple channels.
- Encoding := The encoding to be used by this rule. This can be either JSON or "MsgPack":https://msgpack.org

<br/>

If the rule is in the *Single Request* mode, it will also have the following options:

- "Enveloped":/general/webhooks#enveloping := If the rule has the Enveloped option set, then data delivered by this rule will be wrapped in an "Ably envelope":/general/webhooks#envelope-examples. Otherwise, the rule will send the "raw payload":/general/webhooks#no-envelope-examples

<br/>

If the rule is in the *Batch Request* mode, it will have the following additional options:

- Sign with key := Ably will optionally sign the data with the specified private key. This will be included as an HTTP header @X-Ably-Signature@ in every HTTP post request issued to your server. See "webhook security":/general/webhooks#security for more details.
