Channel options are used for <span lang="jsall,java,swift,objc,csharp">setting "channel parameters":/channels/options and</span> "configuring encryption":/channels/options/encryption.

blang[jsall].
  @ChannelOptions@, a plain JavaScript object, may optionally be specified when instancing a "@Channel@":/channels, and this may be used to specify channel-specific options. The following attributes can be defined on the object:

blang[ruby].
  @ChannelOptions@, a Hash object, may optionally be specified when instancing a "@Channel@":/channels, and this may be used to specify channel-specific options. The following key symbol values can be added to the Hash:

blang[php].
  @ChannelOptions@, an Associative Array, may optionally be specified when instancing a "@Channel@":/channels, and this may be used to specify channel-specific options. The following named keys and values can be added to the Associated Array:

blang[java,swift,objc,go].
  <span lang="swift,objc">@ART@</span><span lang="java">@io.ably.lib.types.@</span>@ChannelOptions@ may optionally be specified when instancing a "@Channel@":/channels, and this may be used to specify channel-specific options.

blang[csharp].
  @IO.Ably.ChannelOptions@ may optionally be specified when instancing a "@Channel@":/channels, and this may be used to specify channel-specific options.

h4.
  default: Properties
  java:    Members
  ruby:    Attributes

blang[default].
    - <span lang="ruby">:cipher</span><span lang="csharp,go">CipherParams</span><span lang="jsall,java,swift,objc">cipher</span> := Requests encryption for this channel when not null, and specifies encryption-related parameters (such as algorithm, chaining mode, key length and key). See "an example":/channels/options/encryption<br>__Type: "@CipherParams@":/api/realtime-sdk/encryption#cipher-params<span lang="jsall"> or an options object containing at a minimum a @key@</span><span lang="java"> or a @Param[]@ list containing at a minimum a @key@</span><span lang="ruby"> or an options hash containing at a minimum a @key@</span><span lang="php"> or an Associative Array containing at a minimum a @key@</span>__


blang[jsall,java,swift,objc,csharp].
  - <span lang="jsall,java,swift,objc">params</span><span lang="csharp">Params</span> := Optional "parameters":/channels/options which specify behaviour of the channel.<br>__Type: <span lang='java'>@Map<String, String>@</span><span lang='jsall,objc,csharp,swift'>@JSON Object@</span>__
  - <span lang="jsall,java,swift,objc">cipher</span><span lang="csharp">CipherParams</span> := Requests encryption for this channel when not null, and specifies encryption-related parameters (such as algorithm, chaining mode, key length and key). See "an example":/api/realtime-sdk/encryption#getting-started<br>__Type: "@CipherParams@":/api/realtime-sdk/encryption#cipher-params<span lang="jsall"> or an options object containing at a minimum a @key@</span><span lang="java"> or a @Param[]@ list containing at a minimum a @key@</span><span lang="ruby"> or an options hash containing at a minimum a @key@</span><span lang="php"> or an Associative Array containing at a minimum a @key@</span>__

blang[java].
  h4. Static methods
  
  h6(#with-cipher-key). withCipherKey
  
  bq(definition). static ChannelOptions.withCipherKey(Byte[] or String key)
  
  A helper method to generate a @ChannelOptions@ for the simple case where you only specify a key.
  
  h4. Parameters
  
  - key := A binary @Byte[]@ array or a base64-encoded @String@.
  
  h4. Returns
  
  On success, the method returns a complete @ChannelOptions@ object. Failure will raise an "@AblyException@":/api/realtime-sdk/types#ably-exception.

