A @Message@ represents an individual message that is sent to or received from Ably.

h6(#name).
  default: name
  csharp: Name

The event name, if provided. <br>__Type: @String@__

h6(#data).
  default: data
  csharp: Data

The message payload, if provided.<br>__Type: <span lang="default">@String@, @StringBuffer@, @JSON Object@</span><span lang="java">@String@, @ByteArray@, @JSONObject@, @JSONArray@</span><span lang="csharp">@String@, @byte[]@, @plain C# object that can be serialized to JSON@</span><span lang="ruby">@String@, @Binary@ (ASCII-8BIT String), @Hash@, @Array@</span><span lang="python">@String@, @Bytearray@, @Dict@, @List@</span><span lang="php">@String@, @Binary String@, @Associative Array@, @Array@</span><span lang="objc">@NSString *@, @NSData *@, @NSDictionary *@, @NSArray *@</span><span lang="swift">@String@, @NSData@, @Dictionary@, @Array@</span><span lang="flutter">@String@, @Map@, @List@</span>__

h6(#extras).
  default: extras
  csharp: Extras

Metadata and/or ancillary payloads, if provided. Valid payloads include "@push@":/docs/push/publish#payload, "@headers@" (a map of strings to strings for arbitrary customer-supplied metadata), "@ephemeral@":/docs/pub-sub/advanced#ephemeral, and "@privileged@":/docs/integrations/webhooks#skipping objects.<br>__Type: <span lang="java">@JSONObject@, @JSONArray@</span><span lang="csharp">plain C# object that can be converted to JSON</span><span lang="jsall">@JSON Object@</span><span lang="ruby">@Hash@, @Array@</span><span lang="python">@Dict@, @List@</span><span lang="swift">@Dictionary@, @Array@</span><span lang="objc">@NSDictionary *@, @NSArray *@</span><span lang="php">@Associative Array@, @Array@</span>__

h6(#id).
  default: id
  csharp: Id

A Unique ID assigned by Ably to this message.<br>__Type: @String@__

h6(#client-id).
  default: clientId
  csharp: ClientId
  ruby: client_id
  python: client_id

The client ID of the publisher of this message.<br>__Type: @String@__

h6(#connection-id).
  default: connectionId
  csharp: ConnectionId
  ruby: connection_id
  python: connection_id

The connection ID of the publisher of this message.<br>__Type: @String@__

h6(#connection-key).
  default: connectionKey
  csharp,go: ConnectionKey
  ruby,python: connection_key

A connection key, which can optionally be included for a REST publish as part of the "publishing on behalf of a realtime client functionality":/docs/pub-sub/advanced#publish-on-behalf.<br>__Type: @String@__

h6(#timestamp).
  default: timestamp
  csharp: Timestamp

Timestamp when the message was received by the Ably, as <span lang="default">milliseconds since the epoch</span><span lang="ruby">a @Time@ object</span><br>.__Type: <span lang="default">@Integer@</span><span lang="java">@Long Integer@</span><span lang="csharp">@DateTimeOffset@</span><span lang="ruby">@Time@</span><span lang="objc,swift">@NSDate@</span>__

h6(#encoding).
  default: encoding
  csharp: Encoding

This will typically be empty as all messages received from Ably are automatically decoded client-side using this value. However, if the message encoding cannot be processed, this attribute will contain the remaining transformations not applied to the @data@ payload.<br>__Type: @String@__

blang[jsall].

  h6(#action).
    default: action

  The action type of the message, one of the "@MessageAction@":/docs/api/realtime-sdk/types#message-action enum values.<br>__Type: @int enum { MESSAGE_CREATE, MESSAGE_UPDATE, MESSAGE_DELETE, META, MESSAGE_SUMMARY }@__

  h6(#serial).
    default: serial

  This message's unique serial (an identifier that will be the same in all future updates of this message).<br>__Type: @String@__

  h6(#created-at).
    default: createdAt

  The timestamp of the very first version of a given message (will differ from @timestamp@ only if the message has been updated or deleted).<br>__Type: @Integer@__

  h6(#version).
    default: version

  The version of the message, lexicographically-comparable with other versions (that share the same serial). Will differ from the serial only if the message has been updated or deleted.<br>__Type: @String@__

  h6(#operation).
    default: operation

  In the case of an updated or deleted message, this will contain metadata about the update or delete operation.<br>__Type: "@Operation@":/docs/api/realtime-sdk/types#message-operation__

h3(constructors).
  default: Message constructors

h6(#message-from-encoded).
  default: Message.fromEncoded

bq(definition).
  default: Message.fromEncoded(Object encodedMsg, ChannelOptions channelOptions?) -> Message

A static factory method to create a "@Message@":/docs/api/realtime-sdk/types#message from a deserialized @Message@-like object encoded using Ably's wire protocol.

h4. Parameters

- encodedMsg := a @Message@-like deserialized object.<br>__Type: @Object@__
- channelOptions := an optional "@ChannelOptions@":/docs/api/realtime-sdk/types#channel-options. If you have an encrypted channel, use this to allow the library can decrypt the data.<br>__Type: @Object@__

h4. Returns

A "@Message@":/docs/api/realtime-sdk/types#message object

h6(#message-from-encoded-array).
  default: Message.fromEncodedArray

bq(definition).
  default: Message.fromEncodedArray(Object[] encodedMsgs, ChannelOptions channelOptions?) -> Message[]

A static factory method to create an array of "@Messages@":/docs/api/realtime-sdk/types#message from an array of deserialized @Message@-like object encoded using Ably's wire protocol.

h4. Parameters

- encodedMsgs := an array of @Message@-like deserialized objects.<br>__Type: @Array@__
- channelOptions := an optional "@ChannelOptions@":/docs/api/realtime-sdk/types#channel-options. If you have an encrypted channel, use this to allow the library can decrypt the data.<br>__Type: @Object@__

h4. Returns

An @Array@ of "@Message@":/docs/api/realtime-sdk/types#message objects
