An @PushChannelSubscription@ is a type encapsulating the subscription of a device or group of devices sharing a "client identifier":/core-features/authentication#identified-clients to a channel in order to receive push notifications.

h4.
  default: Properties
  java:    Members
  ruby:    Attributes

- <span lang="default">channel</span> := the channel that this push notification subscription is associated with<br>__Type: @String@__

- <span lang="default">deviceId</span><span lang="ruby">device_id</span> := the device with this identifier is linked to this channel subscription. When present, <span lang="default">@clientId@</span><span lang="ruby">@client_id@</span> is never present<br>__Type: @String@__

- <span lang="default">clientId</span><span lang="ruby">client_id</span> := devices with this "client identifier":/core-features/authentication#identified-clients are included in this channel subscription. When present, <span lang="default">@deviceId@</span><span lang="ruby">@device_id@</span> is never present<br>__Type: @String@__

h3.
  default: PushChannelSubscription constructors

h4(#push-channel-subscription-for-device).
  default: PushChannelSubscription.forDevice
  ruby: PushChannelSubscription.for_device

bq(definition).
  default: PushChannelSubscription.forDevice(String channel, String deviceId) -> PushChannelSubscription
  ruby: PushChannelSubscription.for_device(String channel, String device_id) -> PushChannelSubscription

A static factory method to create a @PushChannelSubscription@ object for a channel and single device.

h4. Parameters

- channel := channel name linked to this push channel subscription<br>__Type: @String@__
- <span lang="default">deviceId</span><span lang="ruby">device_id</span> := the device with this identifier will be linked with this push channel subscription<br>__Type: @String@__

h4. Returns

A "@PushChannelSubscription@":/realtime/types#push-channel-subscription  object

h4(#push-channel-subscription-for-client-id).
  default: PushChannelSubscription.forClient
  ruby: PushChannelSubscription.for_client

bq(definition).
  default: PushChannelSubscription.forDevice(String channel, String clientId) -> PushChannelSubscription
  ruby: PushChannelSubscription.for_device(String channel, String client_id) -> PushChannelSubscription

A static factory method to create a @PushChannelSubscription@ object for a channel and group of devices sharing a "client identifier":/core-features/authentication#identified-clients.

h4. Parameters

- channel := channel name linked to this push channel subscription<br>__Type: @String@__
- <span lang="default">clientId</span><span lang="ruby">client_id</span> := devices with this "client identifier":/core-features/authentication#identified-clients are included in the new push channel subscription<br>__Type: @String@__

h4. Returns

A @PushChannelSubscription@ object
