---
title: API Reference
meta_description: "API Reference section of the Ably developer documentation."
meta_keywords: "Ably, Ably realtime, API Reference, Realtime SDK, REST SDK, REST API"
section: api-reference
index: 0
---

The Client library SDKs and REST API references for Ably.  

This section of the documentation provides the following references:

* "Client library Realtime SDK":/api-reference/realtime-sdk
* "Client library REST SDK":/api-reference/rest-sdk
* "REST API":/api-reference/rest-api

h2(#sdks). Client library SDKs

Depending on availability, an Ably client library SDK may support both a realtime interface and a REST interface. Some SDKs only provide a REST interface. You can check availability on this "SDK page":https://ably.com/download. 

The realtime interface allows your client to both publish and subscribe to a channel, but the REST interface only allows you to publish to a channel. The REST interface can also be used for non-recurring operations such as obtaining statistics, or checking status. The REST interface has less resource impact, as it is much simpler than the realtime interface. 

Typically the REST interface is used on the server, as the server's main task is to authenticate clients, but does not usually need to subscribe to a channel to obtain realtime events.

h2(#rest-api). REST API

A raw REST API is also provided - you don't need to install any SDK to use this. This is used where an Ably client library SDK is not available for your chosen platform, or you do not wish to use a client library SDK due to resource constraints.

h2(#further-information). Further information

In addition to the API references listed previously, our developer documentation also provides information on how these interfaces are used, and this covers key concepts such as connections, channels, messages and the pub/sub pattern. You can find that information on the following pages:

* "Client library Realtime SDK - Overview":/realtime
* "Client library REST SDK - Overview":/rest
* "Realtime and TEST interface use cases":/realtime#realtime-vs-rest
* "REST API - Overview":/rest-api
