---
title: Azure Functions
section: general
index: 23
languages:
  - none
jump_to:
  Help with:
    - Fields#fields
    - Example#examples
---

As part of "Reactor Events":/general/events, it is possible to integrate with various systems.

"Azure Functions":https://azure.microsoft.com/en-gb/services/functions provide event-driven serverless compute functions which allow users to easily run code whenever events are sent to it.

h2(#tutorials). Tutorials & Examples

If you would like to just dive in and see an example of this being implemented, then take a look at our "Azure Functions tutorial":/tutorials/reactor-event-azure.

For more details on the specifics of how Reactor Events and our integrations work, check out our "Reactor Events documentation":/general/events.

h2(#fields). Rule fields

- Azure App ID := The App ID of your "Azure app":https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-functions/functions-create-first-azure-function#create-a-function-app
- Function Name := the name of your "Azure Function":https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-functions/functions-create-first-azure-function#create-a-function-app
- Headers := Optionally allows you to provide a set of headers that will be included in all HTTP POST requests. You must use format @"XCustom-Header-1:value1"@ for each header you add
- "Source":/general/events#sources := Choose which of @Message@, @Presence@, or @Channel Lifecycle@ events on channels should activate this Reactor Event Rule. @Channel Lifecycle@ events are only available in "Batch Request":/general/events#batching mode
- "Request Mode":/general/events#batching := This will either be in @Single Request@ mode or @Batch Request@ mode. "Single Request":/general/events#single-request will send each event as separately to the endpoint specified by the Rule. "Batch Request":/general/events#batch-request will send events triggered concurrently in the same request
- Channel filter := An optional filter, which allows the Rule to be applied to a restricted set of channels. This can be specified as a regular expression, allowing for swathes of channels to be used
- Encoding := The encoding to be used by this Rule. This can be either JSON or "MsgPack":https://msgpack.org

<br/>

If the Rule is in the *Single Request* mode, it will also have the following options:

- "Enveloped":/general/events#enveloping := If the rule has the Enveloped option set, then data delivered by this Rule will be wrapped in an "Ably envelope":/general/events#envelope-examples. Otherwise, the Rule will send the "raw payload":/general/events#no-envelope-examples

<br/>

If the Rule is in the *Batch Request* mode, it will have the following additional options:

- Sign with key := Ably will optionally sign the data with the specified private key. This will be included as an HTTP header @X-Ably-Signature@ in every HTTP post request issued to your server. See "webhook security":/general/events#security for more details.

h2(#examples). Examples

<%= partial partial_version('general/events/_events_examples_intro') %>

h3(#batch-examples). Batched event payloads

<%= partial partial_version('general/events/_batched_event_headers') %>

<%= partial partial_version('general/events/_batched_events') %>

h3(#envelope-examples). Enveloped event payloads

<%= partial partial_version('general/events/_enveloped_event_headers') %>

<%= partial partial_version('general/events/_enveloped_events') %>

h3(#no-envelope-examples). Non-enveloped event payloads

<%= partial partial_version('general/events/_non_enveloped_event_headers') %>

<%= partial partial_version('general/events/_non_enveloped_events') %>

