---
title: Google Cloud Functions
section: general
index: 24
languages:
  - none
jump_to:
  Help with:
    - Fields#fields
    - Restrictions#restrictions
    - Example#example
---

As part of "Reactor Events":/general/events, it is possible to integrate with various systems.

"Google Cloud Functions":https://cloud.google.com/functions provide event-driven serverless compute functions which allow users to easily run code whenever events are sent to it.

h2(#tutorials). Tutorials & Examples

If you would like to just dive in and see an example of this being implemented, then take a look at our "Google Cloud Functions tutorial":/tutorials/reactor-event-google.

For more details on the specifics of how Reactor Events and our integrations work, check out our "Reactor Events documentation":/general/events.

h2(#fields). Rule fields

- Region := the region in which "your Google Function is hosted":https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/regions-zones.
- Project ID := the project ID for your "Google Cloud Project":https://cloud.google.com that was generated when you created your project
- Function := the name of your "Google Function":https://cloud.google.com/functions
- Headers := Optionally allows you to provide a set of headers that will be included in all HTTP POST requests. You must use format @"XCustom-Header-1:value1"@ for each header you add
- "Source":/general/events#sources := Choose which of @Message@, @Presence@, or @Channel Lifecycle@ events on channels should activate this Reactor Event Rule. @Channel Lifecycle@ events are only available in "Batch Request":/general/events#batching mode
- "Request Mode":/general/events#batching := This will either be in @Single Request@ mode or @Batch Request@ mode. "Single Request":/general/events#single-request will send each event as seperately to the endpoint specified by the Rule. "Batch Request":/general/events#batch-request will send events triggered concurrently in the same request
- Channel filter := An optional filter, which allows the Rule to be applied to a restricted set of channels. This can be specified as a regular expression, allowing for swathes of channels to be used
- Encoding := The encoding to be used by this Rule. This can be either JSON or "MsgPack":http://msgpack.org

If the Rule is in the *Single Request* mode, it will also have the following options:

<br/>

- "Enveloped":/general/events#enveloping := If the rule has the Enveloped option set, then data delivered by this Rule will be wrapped in an "Ably envelope":/general/events#envelope-examples. Otherwise, the Rule will send the "raw payload":/general/events#no-envelope-examples

<br/>

If the Rule is in the *Batch Request* mode, it will have the following additional options:

- Sign with key := Ably will optionally sign the data with the specified private key. This will be included as an HTTP header @X-Ably-Signature@ in every HTTP post request issued to your server. See "webhook security":/general/events#security for more details.

h2(#example). Examples

Messages to Google Cloud Functions will match the examples provided on the "main Reactor Events page":/general/events#examples.
