---
title: Object storage
meta_description: "Learn about LiveObjects object storage."
product: liveobjects
languages:
  - javascript
---

<aside data-type='experimental'>
<p>LiveObjects is currently Experimental. Its features are still in development and subject to rapid change.</p>
</aside>

h2(#default-persistence). Default object storage - 90 days

Ably durably stores all objects on a channel for a retention period that is configured to 90 days by default. If the data is not updated within the retention period, it will automatically expire. After expiry, the channel is reset to its initial state and only includes an empty "root object":/docs/liveobjects/concepts/objects#root-object.

<aside data-type='note'>
<p>In a future release you will be able to configure the default object storage duration via "channel rules":/docs/channels#rules . If you're interested in this feature, please "get in touch":/contact with your requirements.</p>
</aside>

h2(#outside-persistence). Store objects outside of Ably

You can store your objects outside of Ably by obtaining the channel objects via the "REST API":/docs/liveobjects/rest-api-usage#fetching-objects and storing them in your own database. This is useful if you want to keep a permanent record of the objects on a channel or if you want to perform analytics on the data.

In order to receive notifications when the objects on a channel are updated, use "inband objects":/docs/liveobjects/inband-objects to receive updates as regular channel messages.

<aside data-type='note'>
<p>In a future release you will be able to configure "integration rules":/docs/integrations/webhooks to send objects to your own systems using webhooks or serverless functions. If you're interested in this feature, please "get in touch":/contact with your requirements.</p>
</aside>

h2(#operation-persistence). Operation storage

When you update an object, the change is expressed as an "operation":/docs/liveobjects/concepts/operations that is sent as an "object message":/docs/metadata-stats/stats#messages on the channel. Like all messages, Ably stores object messages for 2 minutes by default.

This means that if a client disconnects from Ably for a short period of time, it can automatically retrieve any operations it may have missed when it reconnects. If a client disconnects for longer than 2 minutes, the client will be sent the latest state of the objects on the channel (which are durably stored for 90 days) when it reconnects, ensuring the client remains fully synchronized.

Operations themselves are not included in the "history":https://ably.com/docs/storage-history/history or "rewind":/docs/channels/options/rewind backlog of a channel. Instead, you should interact with objects directly via the client library.

h2(#limits). Object count and size limits

There is a maximum number of objects that can be stored on a "channel":/docs/pricing/limits#channel, which is configured to 100 objects by default.

<aside data-type='note'>
<p>In a future release you will be able to store a larger number of objects on a channel according to your package. If you're interested in this feature, please "get in touch":/contact with your requirements.</p>
</aside>

A @LiveCounter@ is a double-precision floating-point number and has a size of 8 bytes.

The size of a @LiveMap@ object is calculated as the sum of the length of all keys plus the size of all values where:	

* @string@ values are the length of the string
* @number@ values are 8 bytes
* @boolean@ values are 1 byte
* @bytes@ values are the length of the byte array

The maximum allowed size of a single @LiveMap@ object is the same as the "message size limit":/docs/pricing/limits#message for your package. This is because objects are "synchronized":/docs/liveobjects/concepts/synchronization#client-objects to the client as channel messages.

<aside data-type='note'>
<p>Taken together, the implicit limit on the total size of your channel objects is the "message size limit":/docs/pricing/limits#message for your package multiplied by the maximum number of objects allowed on a channel.</p>
</aside>

For more information, see "limits":/docs/pricing/limits .
