One or more channel rules may be "configured for an app in your dashboard":https://faqs.ably.com/how-do-i-access-my-app-dashboard. These are rules which apply to a channel based on its 'namespace'. The namespace is the first colon-delimited segment of its name (from the start, up to and including, the last character before the @:@). If the channel name contains no colon, the namespace is the entire channel name.

For example, the following channels are all part of the "public" namespace:

* @public@
* @public:events@
* @public:news:americas@

The namespace attributes that can be configured are:

* **Persist all messages** - if enabled, all messages within this namespace will be stored according to the storage rules for your account (24 hours for free accounts). You can access stored messages via the "history API":/realtime/history . Please note that for each message stored, an additional message is deducted from your monthly allocation.
* **State persistence** - if enabled, the very last message published on a channel will be stored for an entire year, retrievable using the "channel rewind mechanism":https://ably.com/blog/channel-rewind by attaching to the channel with "rewind=1.":/realtime/channel-params#rewind Only messages are stored, not presence messages. This last message storage is not accessible using the normal history API, only through rewind.
* **Identified** - if enabled, clients will not be permitted to use (including to attach, publish, or subscribe) matching channels unless they are "identified":/core-features/authentication#identified-clients (they have an assigned client ID). Anonymous clients are not permitted to join these channels. Find out more about "authenticated and identified clients":https://faqs.ably.com/authenticated-and-identified-clients
* **TLS only** - if enabled, only clients who have connected to Ably over TLS will be allowed to use matching channels. "Find out more":https://faqs.ably.com/are-messages-sent-to-and-received-from-ably-securely-using-tls
* **Push notifications enabled** - If checked, publishing messages with a push payload in the extras field is permitted and can trigger the delivery of a push notification to registered devices for the channel. "Find out more":/realtime/push.

Key or token capabilities can also specify access rights based on channel namespace. Find out more about "authentication":/core-features/authentication.