---
title: Error handling
meta_description: "Understand Ably error codes and their causes, to resolve them efficiently."
languages:
  - javascript
---

Use the error codes provided, which include descriptions, possible causes, and solutions, to troubleshoot issues effectively.

h2(#general). General errors

h3(#10000). 10000: No error

This error code indicates that the attempted action was successful and no issues occurred.

h3(#20000). 20000: General error code

This error code is a generic response used when an @errorInfo@ is required for protocol reasons, even though no actual issue has occurred.

h3(#40125). 40125: Maximum number of rules per application exceeded

This error occurs when the application has reached the maximum number of "integration rules":/docs/integrations/streaming?#firehose-rules set by the "limits":/docs/limits#app-limits for your current package.

h3(#40127). 40127: Maximum number of keys per application exceeded

This error occurs when the application has reached the maximum number of "API keys":/docs/account/app/api set by the "limits":/docs/limits#app-limits for your current package.

h2(#client). Client errors

h3(40000). 40000: Bad request

This error occurs when Ably cannot understand the request due to a malformed structure or other issues with the request format.

An example of this error is when a message is published while the connection is in a "suspended state":/docs/connect/states#connection-states.

h3(#40001). 40001: Invalid request body

This error occurs when a request contains invalid content, such as incorrect "data types":/docs/api/realtime-sdk/types#data-types or missing required objects. It is most likely caused by missing required fields or incorrect data formats when sending a request to Ably.

An example of this error is a missing field, such as a @clientId@ in a "token request":/docs/api/token-request-spec#tokenrequest-format.

h3(#40003). 40003: Invalid parameter value

This error occurs when an invalid value is sent in the request. It may be caused by either user input or the SDK sending incorrect parameters.

Additional examples of the @40003@ error code output include:

* *40003: Excessive value for TTL*
This error occurs when the TTL set for a token parameter exceeds the maximum allowed value of 24 hours.
* *40003: Excessive value for TTL (revocation is enabled on this key)*
This error occurs when revocation is enabled, revocable tokens are limited to a TTL of 1 hour instead of 24 hours.

h3(#40005). 40005: Invalid credentials

This error occurs when the "API key":/auth#api-keys or "token":/docs/auth/token used to initialize the library is invalid.
*Resolution:* The following steps can help resolve this issue:

* API key initialization:
** Ensure you are the app's *admin*.
** Open up the DSN dashboard in your Ably account and go to the *API keys* tab.
** Use one of these API keys instead of your current one or create a "new API key":/docs/account/app/api#create with the necessary permissions and privileges and use that to instance the SDK.
* Token initialization:
**  If you are using "token authentication":/docs/auth/token, ensure you are correctly requesting a valid token before using it with Ably.

h3(#40006). 40006: Invalid connection ID

This error occurs when a message is published with an invalid or mismatched "@connectionID@":/docs/messages#properties.

Examples of this error are when:
* A client attempts to publish a message using a malformed @connectionID@.
* A client publishes a realtime message with a @connectionID@ that does not match the currently active connection.
* A connection is identified, but the resolved clientId is missing or incorrect (due to authentication issues or an explicitly provided but incorrect @clientId@).

h3(#40009). 40009: Maximum message length exceeded

This error occurs when the message being published exceeds the maximum size allowed set by the "limits":/docs/limits#app-limits for your current "package":/docs/pricing#packages.

h3(#40010). 40010: Invalid channel name

This error occurs when a "channel name":/docs/channels#use does not meet the required format or contains invalid characters.

h3(#40012). 40012: Invalid client ID

This error occurs when a @clientID@ is invalid due to disallowed characters or a mismatch between the @clientID@ specified in the request and the one assigned in the authentication "token":/docs/auth/token.

Examples of this error are when:

* The client attempts to use @*@ as a @clientID@, which is not allowed because @*@ is used as a wildcard in capability expressions.
* A client tries to authenticate with @clientID@ (@foo@), but the token they are using specifies @clientID@ (@bar@), resulting in an authentication failure.

h3(#40013). 40013: Invalid message data or encoding

This error occurs when the SDK fails to encode the "message payload":/docs/chat/rooms/messages#structure due to an unsupported or non-serializable data type.

An example of this error is when a client attempts to publish an unsupported data type, without proper serialization.

*Resolution:* Try marshalling the payload as JSON or MsgPack before publishing.

h3(#40016). 40016: Invalid message name

This error occurs when the @name@ "property":/docs/messages#properties of a message is not a string. The @name@ field is used to categorize messages within channels, and it must always be a string.

h3(#40017). 40017: Unsupported protocol version or Invalid API version specified

This error occurs when a request does not specify a "protocol":/docs/protocols#available-adapters version or provides an invalid version in the request parameters of a Server-Sent Events (SSE) request. This also occurs when a "WebSocket":/docs/glossary#websocket connection to Ably specifies an invalid API version in the request parameters.

*Resolution*: Ensure that the request specifies a valid protocol version. Note: You will not see this error when using an Ably SDK, as SDKs automatically use valid versions.

*Supported protocol versions*: Ensure that the following protocol versions are used for each connection type:
* SSE connections: 1.1 or greater, for example, 1.2, 2.0.
* WebSocket connections: 0.8, 0.9, 1.1, 1.2, 2.0.

h3(#40020). 40020: Partial failure in batch operation requests

This error occurs when a "batch":/docs/api/rest-api#batch request partially fails, meaning that some operations succeed while others fail.

An example of this error occurs when a client sends a batch request for:

* Revoking tokens: @POST /revokeTokens@
* Publishing messages: @POST /messages@
* Retrieving presence data: @GET /presence@

The following example is a batch operation response that includes partial failures. The @error@ field indicates that some requests within the batch were unsuccessful, while the @batchResponse@ contains individual results for each operation:

```[javascript]
{
  error: new ErrorInfo('Batched response includes errors', 40020, 400),
  batchResponse: results
}
```

h3(#40030). 40030: Invalid publish request (unspecified)

This error occurs when a "publish request":https://ably.com/docs/pub-sub/advanced#publish is malformed.

h3(#40032). 40032: Invalid publish request (impermissible extras field)

This error occurs when a published message contains arbitrary fields in the "@extras@":/docs/api/rest-sdk/messages#extras payload that are not allowed by the Ably service. The @extras@ field is reserved for specific objects related to Ably.

*Resolution*: Place any additional data inside the @headers@ field within @extras@. The @headers@ field must be a flat object (@map<string, string>@ or equivalent) with no nested structures. If using unenveloped Reactor rules, ensure that header names are in @ASCII@, as they will be converted into HTTP, AMQP, or other protocol headers.

The following example is a valid @extras@ object:

```[javascript]
const extras = {
  headers: {
    header1: 'value1',
    header2: 'value2'
  }
};

h3(#40100). 40100: Unauthorized

This error occurs when an action cannot be performed due to a lack of "authentication":/docs/auth.

h3(#40101). 40101: Invalid credentials

This error occurs when "authentication":/auth credentials are invalid. The specific error message may provide further details about the cause.

An example of this error is when a signed token request is invalid due to a mismatched cryptographic signature (MAC does not match) or when the clientId specified in the Ably SDK does not match the clientId in the access token.

*Resolution*: Review your authentication setup and token request implementation. Ensure the following:

* The cryptographic signature (MAC) is correct – If a signed token request is invalid, Ably will reject it.
* The API key used to generate the token request is accurate – Double-check for missing or extra characters.
* The token request JSON is correctly formatted and unaltered, including:
  ** *keyName* must match the API key used in the request.
  ** *clientId* if provided, it must match the one in the client constructor.
  ** *ttl* must be an integer in milliseconds.
  ** *timestamp* must be an integer in milliseconds.
  ** *capability* Must be stringified JSON, not raw JSON.
  ** *nonce* must be a randomly generated string value.
  ** *mac* must be correctly generated using the secret key.
* The *clientId* in the SDK matches the one in the token. If a *clientId* is provided in the token, it must align with the *clientId* set in the Ably client options.
* A *clientId* cannot be changed on an existing connection. Ensure consistency in authentication.
* For JWT authentication, confirm that *clientId* is correctly set in *x-ably-clientId*.

h3(#40102). 40102: Incompatible credentials

This error occurs when "authentication":/auth credentials do not match the existing connection, causing the connection to fail.

Examples of this error include:

* A client attempts to authenticate with a clientId that differs from the one used in the existing connection
* Trying to resume a connection using credentials from a different app.
* Using @auth.authorize@ with a different API key to attempt to upgrade client capabilities.

*Resolution*: Ensure that the clientId in the token matches the one used in the connection. Verify that authentication credentials belong to the same app as the original connection. If using @auth.authorize@, make sure it is called with the correct key to avoid capability mismatches.

h3(#40103). 40103: Invalid use of Basic auth over non-TLS transport

This error occurs when an API key is used over a non-TLS (unencrypted) connection, which is not permitted due to security risks. API keys are long-lived credentials, making them more vulnerable if exposed. Unlike short-lived tokens, API keys remain valid indefinitely, meaning a compromised key presents a significant security risk.

Non-TLS transports can be inspected by network devices routing traffic between the client and Ably. Ably does not allow API key authentication over non-TLS connections. However, Ably supports "basic authentication":/docs/auth/basic over TLS and "token authentication":/docs/auth/token over non-TLS connections.

*Resolution*: Select the appropriate "authentication mechanism":/docs/auth#selecting-auth based on the transport

h3(#40104). 40104: Timestamp not current

This error occurs when a signed token request sent to Ably is too old. Ably enforces timestamp validation to ensure "@TokenRequest@":/docs/auth/token#token-request remain valid for a limited time, reducing the risk of interception and misuse.

*Resolutions*: The following steps can help resolve this issue:
* Ensure that the authentication servers clock is accurate when generating signed token requests.
* If time synchronization is unreliable, set the @queryTime@ "ClientOptions":/docs/api/rest-sdk/types#client-options object to true when initializing the Ably client. This ensures Ably's server time is used.
* Do not cache signed token requests on the authentication server or client. Each token request must be freshly generated and used immediately.
* If using Next.js 13, prevent caching issues by setting revalidate to 0 or changing the request method from @GET@ to @POST@ using the @authMethod@ "ClientOption":/docs/api/rest-sdk/types#client-options.

h3(#40105). 40105: Nonce value replayed

This error occurs when a signed "token request":/docs/api/realtime-sdk/types#token-request has been used more than once. Ably enforces nonce (number used once) checks to ensure that each signed token request is unique, as a security measure.

Examples of this error include:
* A client sends a signed token request to Ably but does not receive the response due to network issues. If the client automatically retries the HTTP request in a fallback data center, Ably detects the duplicate nonce and rejects it.
* An authentication server caches and reuses signed token requests instead of generating a unique one for each request.
* A misconfigured "@authCallback@":/docs/auth/token#auth-callback function reuses the same token request on every invocation instead of generating a fresh one.

The following example is of an incorrect @authCallback@ implementation. The tokenRequest is not renewed. A new token request should be requested from your server at this point:

<pre><code>
var tokenRequest = "<new-token-request>";
var ably = new Ably.Realtime({
  authCallback: function(tokenParams, callback) {
    callback(null, tokenRequest);
  }
});
</code></pre>


*Resolution*: The following steps can help resolve this issue:
* Ensure that each token request is unique and never cached by the authentication server or client.
* Always generate a new token request each time authCallback is invoked.
* If retrieving a token request over HTTP, prevent caching by using the Cache-Control header (no-cache, no-store, must-revalidate) or by adding a cache-busting query string parameter for example, @?rnd=73849275@.
* If network issues are suspected, check logs and debug the token request process to confirm proper request handling.


h3(#40106). 40106: Unable to obtain credentials from given parameters

This error occurs when invalid "authentication"/docs/auth options (key or token) are provided to the Ably SDK, preventing successful authentication.

An example of this error is when no "API key":/docs/auth#api-keys or "token":/docs/auth/token is supplied, or when an authentication request is made using another token instead of an API key.

h3(#40111). 40111: Connection limits exceeded

This error occurs when the peak "connection limit":/docs/pricing/limits#connection for your account has been exceeded, preventing new connections from being established until existing ones disconnect.

h3(#40112). 40112: Account blocked (message limits exceeded)

This error occurs when your account has exceeded the allocated "message limit":/docs/pricing/limits#message based on your "package":/docs/pricing#packages. Once this limit is reached, further message publishing is blocked.

h3(#40114). 40114: Account-wide peak channel limit exceeded

This error occurs when your account has exceeded the concurrent "channel limit":/docs/pricing/limits#channel, preventing additional channels from being created.

Examples of this error include:
*  The application attempts to open more channels than the account allows, causing new channel creation to be blocked.
* During development, an implementation error or bug causes unintended channel creation, leading to the limit being reached.

h3(#40115). 40115: Account restricted (request limit exceeded)

This error occurs when your account has exceeded the allocated "limits":/docs/pricing/limits based on your "package":/docs/pricing#packages.

h3(#40131). 40131: Key revoked

This error occurs when the "Ably API key":/docs/auth#api-keys used to initialize the SDK is no longer valid because it has been revoked by an admin of the application.

*Resolution*: The following steps can help resolve this issue:
* If you are an admin, go to the API keys tab in the Ably dashboard to check for valid keys. Use an existing valid key or create a new one with the necessary permissions.
* If you are not an admin, request a new API key from an administrator or obtain a token request generated with a valid key.

h3(#40133). 40133: Wrong key; cannot revoke tokens with a different key than the one that issued them

This error occurs when the "Ably API key":/docs/auth#api-keys used to authorize a token revocation request does not match the key that originally issued the token.

An example of this error is when a request attempts to revoke a token using a different API key than the one specified in the request path parameter.

*Resolution*: The following steps can help resolve this issue:
* Ensure that the public API key ID used in the request matches the key that originally issued the token.
* Verify that the keyname in the request path corresponds with the API key used for authentication.

h3(#40141). 40141: Token revoked

This error occurs when attempting to authenticate with a "token":/docs/auth/token that has been revoked and is no longer valid.

*Resolution*: Ensure that you are using a valid, "non-revoked":/auth/token-revocation. token for authentication. If needed, generate a new token and use it for authorization.

h3(#40142). 40142: Token expired

This error occurs when the authentication "token":/docs/auth/token#refresh has expired and is no longer valid for use.

An example of this error is when a client attempts to authenticate with a token that has exceeded its time-to-live (TTL) and cannot be refreshed.

*Resolution*: The following steps can help resolve this issue:
* Use "@authUrl@":/docs/auth/token#auth-url or "@authCallback@":/docs/auth/token#auth-callback in your client configuration to enable automatic token renewal.
* If @authUrl@ or @authCallback@ is correctly configured, the client SDK will automatically renew the token when needed, so you may see this error temporarily before renewal occurs.

h3(#40143). 40143: Token unrecognized

This error occurs when the provided token is not recognized as a valid Ably "token":/docs/auth/token-authentication, Ably "JWT":/docs/auth/jwt, or a JWT containing a valid Ably token.

An example of this error is when a JWT is incorrectly formatted or when an Ably token does not follow the expected structure, for example: @<appId>.<randomBytes>@. Any token that does not adhere to the correct format will not be recognized/

*Resolution*: Validate the token format before using it for authentication. If creating a "JWT":/docs/auth/jwt, use a standard JWT library to ensure correct generation. If using an Ably token, verify that it matches the expected format as returned from the "@requestToken@":/docs/api/token-request-spec#examples endpoint.

h3(#40144). 40144: Unexpected error decoding JWT; decode exception

This error occurs when the "JWT":/auth/jwt. provided for authentication cannot be validated by Ably due to incorrect formatting, missing claims, or unsupported configurations.

This error occurs when the "JWT":/auth/jwt provided for authentication cannot be validated by Ably. The specific reason for the failure will be available in the reason property of a "@ConnectionStateChange@":/docs/api/realtime-sdk/types#connection-state-change object or in an error response from a REST request.

Examples of this error include:
* Missing or invalid payload claims, such as iat (issued at) or exp (expiration).
* Using a deprecated or unsupported signing algorithm.
* Providing an empty string for @x-ably-capability@.
* Using an empty string or non-string value for "@x-ably-revocation-key@":/docs/auth/revocation#revocation-key.
* Missing kid (Key ID) when using "JWT authentication with an API key":/docs/api/realtime-sdk/authentication#ably-jwt.

h3(#40160). 40160: Action not permitted

This error occurs when the client does not have permission to perform the requested action.

An example of this error is when a token request includes an empty "capability object":/docs/auth/capabilities#capabilities-token, for example: @({})@, meaning the client has no assigned permissions, or when the requested "resource":/docs/auth/capabilities#wildcards does not match the API key's allowed capabilities.

*Resolution*: Ensure the "API key":/docs/auth#api-keys supports the required "capabilities":/docs/auth/capabilities#capabilities-key for the requested action.

h3(#40161). 40161: Access denied to channel: namespace requires identified clients

This error occurs when a non-identified client attempts to access a channel that requires an identified client. By default, the identified "namespace":/docs/channels#namespaces enforces this restriction, and each application's namespace configuration can be found in the application settings.

*Resolution*: The following steps can help resolve this issue:
* Authenticate the client before accessing channels that require identified clients.
* Modify channel rules:
** On your application in the Ably dashboard
** Select the *Settings* tab, and navigate to the *Channel rules* section.

h3(#40170). 40170: Error from client token callback

This error occurs when an authentication attempt using "@authUrl@":/docs/auth/token#auth-url or "@authCallback@":/docs/auth/token#auth-callback fails due to a timeout, network issue, invalid token format, or another authentication error condition.

Examples of this error include:
* A @TokenRequest@ callback times out after the default 10-second limit.
* The @authUrl@ response is missing a Content-Type header.
* The @authUrl@ response has an unsupported Content-Type.

*Resolution*: The following steps can help resolve this issue:
* Check for network latency between the client and the authentication server.
* Ensure the authentication server returns a valid Content-Type header and one of the supported content types:
** @application/json@
** @text/plain@
** @application/jwt@
* Additional error details can be found in the @error.message@ field.

h3(#40171). 40171: No means provided to renew auth token

This error occurs when no "@authUrl@":/docs/auth/token#auth-url or "@authCallback@":/docs/auth/token#auth-callback is provided in "@clientOptions@":/docs/getting-started/setup#options when initializing the Ably REST or Realtime SDK.

Tokens have a set expiration time, and once expired, they are no longer valid for communication with Ably. If @authUrl@ or @authCallback@ is configured, the SDK will automatically request a new token before expiration, ensuring uninterrupted operation.

*Resolution*: Ensure that @authUrl@ or @authCallback@ is set in your client configuration. This allows the SDK to automatically request a new token before the current one expires.

h3. 40300: Forbidden

This error occurs when a requested action is not permitted. It serves as the default response for forbidden actions and can be triggered by various issues.

The following are example for this error:
* Mismatched SDK versions, occurring if an application uses multiple versions of the Ably SDK, leading to inconsistencies in connections.
* A disabled account, indicating that the app belongs to an account that has been manually disabled by Ably.
* An incorrect URL for a private cluster.


h3(#40330). 40330: Unable to activate account due to placement constraint (unspecified)

This error occurs when an app belonging to a dedicated (private) "cluster":/docs/platform-customization#dedicated-and-isolated-clusters is accessed using an incorrect endpoint. "Enterprise":/docs/pricing/enterprise customers with private clusters receive "custom":/docs/platform-customization#setting-up-a-custom-environment environment endpoints specific to their deployment.

An example of this error is when an app configured for a private cluster tries to connect via the default global endpoint, which may cause the account to appear disabled in the global scope.

*Resolution*: Check your custom environment settings for all connecting clients to ensure they point to the correct private cluster endpoints.

h3(#40331). 40331: Unable to activate account due to placement constraint (incompatible environment)

This error occurs when an app that belongs to a dedicated (private) "cluster":/docs/platform-customization#dedicated-and-isolated-clusters is accessed using an incorrect URL. This often happens when the correct environment is not specified when initializing a client library. "Enterprise":/docs/pricing/enterprise customers with private clusters receive "custom":/docs/platform-customization#setting-up-a-custom-environment environment endpoints specific to their deployment.

If a request arrives at an unexpected dedicated cluster or incorrect region, the account in that scope may be disabled, triggering this error.

An example of this error is when a client intended for a dedicated environment, such as acme, connects to the default global endpoint (@realtime.ably.io@) instead of the correct dedicated cluster endpoint (@acme-realtime.ably.io@). If the expected environment is not configured, requests may be rejected.

*Resolution*: Verify that all connecting clients are configured with the correct custom environment settings to ensure they are pointing to the intended dedicated cluster.

h3(#40332). 40332: Unable to activate account due to placement constraint (incompatible site)

This error occurs when attempting to connect to an app for an account restricted to a specific region.

An example of this error is when a client attempts to connect to an Ably app restricted to the EU region but does not specify the EU environment in the SDK configuration.

*Resolution*: The following steps can help resolve this issue:
* Ensure you are configured with the correct environment for your "region-restricted":/https://faqs.ably.com/do-you-have-an-option-to-keep-my-data-in-europe-or-the-united-states account.
* If your account has a regional constraint, you should have been provided with a "custom":/docs/platform-customization#setting-up-a-custom-environment environment to pass to the "@ClientOptions@"/"custom":/docs/platform-customization#setting-up-a-custom-environment.
* Verify that your connection settings match the region assigned to your account.

h3(#40400). 40400: Not found

This error occurs when the requested resource does not exist. This can apply to an Ably app, client, device, connection, API key, or token. The accompanying error message provides more details about the missing resource.

An example of this error is when attempting to authenticate using an Ably API key or token, but the specified app ID cannot be found. This may happen if:
* The app ID is incorrect.
* The app ID does not exist in the current environment (especially if using a custom deployment).
* The app ID does not match the expected case-sensitive format.

his error may occur when attempting to authenticate using an incorrect API key ID, which may be due to:
* An invalid API key ID.
* Not being found in the specified environment
* Incorrectly formatted due to case sensitivity.

h3(#42910). 42910: Rate limit exceeded; request rejected

This error occurs when a hard "limit":/docs/pricing/limits on your account has been reached, preventing further requests until the limit resets. The duration of the limit depends on the type of rate limit:
* Instantaneous rate limits typically last up to six seconds before allowing message publishing to resume.
* Other limits may apply on an hourly or monthly basis.

An example of this error is when a client exceeds the maximum allowed message rate on a channel.

In the following example, the metric @channel.maxRate@ represents the maximum rate of messages allowed to be published on a channel per second. The permitted rate is 5000 messages per second, but the client is attempting to publish 5015 messages per second, triggering the limit.

<pre>
Rate limit exceeded; request rejected (nonfatal);
metric = channel.maxRate;
interval = 2018-01-05:10:10:3;
permitted rate = 5000;
current rate = 5015;
scope = channel:[YOUR APP ID]:[YOUR CHANNEL]
(status: 429, code: 42910) (code: 42910, http status: 429)
</pre>

*Resolution*: Wait for the rate limit period to reset before retrying. Optimize your message publishing to stay within allowed limits. Upgrade your package if higher throughput is required. Review your account limits to determine which restriction has been hit.

h3(#42911). 42911: Maximum account-wide instantaneous messages rate exceeded

This error occurs when the number of "messages":/docs/pricing/limits#message sent per second exceeds the hard limit imposed on an account. To maintain service reliability for all users, Ably enforces usage limits at different levels, including monthly, hourly, and per-second thresholds.

h3(#42922). 42922: Rate limit exceeded; too many requests

This error occurs when a client has made too many requests within a 5-minute time window, causing the request to be rejected. The "limit":/docs/pricing/limits#hitting remains in effect for up to 30 seconds but may persist longer if request volume remains above the threshold from the same IP address.

This rate limit is in place to protect the Ably platform and is not expected during normal use.

h2(#server). Server errors

h3(#40011). 40011: Stale ring state

This error occurs when using the channel "enumeration":docs/api/rest-api#enumeration-rest API and the state of the cluster changes between successive calls, causing a pagination sequence to become invalid. Note: This issue does not occur if the enumeration request is fully satisfied within the first response page.

h3(#42912). 42912: Channel iteration call already in progress

This error occurs when multiple concurrent "metadata REST requests":/docs/metadata-stats/metadata#rest are made to retrieve a list of active channels. The API is rate-limited, allowing only one in-flight call at a time. Additional concurrent requests will be rejected with this error.

*Resolution*: The following steps can help resolve this issue:
* Ensure that only one request is in progress at any given time.
* Implement request queuing or backoff strategies to avoid sending concurrent calls.
* If you require enhanced channel "enumeration capabilities":"docs/api/rest-api#enumeration-rest, visit this page to request access to the preview API.

h3(#500). 500: Internal error

This error occurs when there is an issue within Ably's system.

h3(#500). 50000: Internal error

This error occurs when there is an issue within Ably's system.

h3(#50001). 50001: Internal channel error

This error occurs when there is an internal issue on an Ably channel.

h3(#50002). 50002: Internal connection error

This error occurs when there is an internal connection issue.

h3(#50003). 50003: Timeout error

This error occurs when a "connection":/docs/connect/states#connection-states request to Ably times out.

An example of this error is when a client attempts to publish a message to a channel, but the operation fails to complete within the allowed time.

Examples of this error include:
* Poor network conditions affecting connectivity.
* Improper usage of the Ably SDKs leading to unexpected delays.
* Temporary Ably server issues impacting response times.

h3(#50305). 50305: Ably's routing layer was unable to service this request

This error occurs as a result of a request not being handled due to an internal routing error within the Ably service.

h2(#connection). Connection errors

h3(#80000). 80000: Connection failed

This error occurs when the SDK is having trouble "connecting":/docs/connect/states#connection-states to Ably, likely due to client-side network connectivity issues.

Note: The SDK will automatically retry the connection after 15 seconds.

h3(#80002). 80002: Connection suspended

This error occurs when the SDK is having trouble "connecting":/docs/connect/states#connection-states to Ably. This is likely due to client-side network connectivity issues, and has failed to establish a connection within 2 minutes.

Note: The SDK will automatically retry the connection after 15 seconds.

h3(#80003). 80003: Generic disconnection error

This error occurs when the SDK is having trouble "connecting":/docs/connect/states#connection-states to Ably, likely due to client-side network connectivity issues.

Note: The SDK will automatically retry the connection after 15 seconds.

h3(#80008). 80008: Unable to recover connection (connection expired)

This error occurs when a "connection":/docs/connect/states#connection-states resume attempt fails because the original connection has expired. This typically happens when the resume attempt occurs after the two-minute window has passed.

If this error occurs, the client establishes a new connection instead of resuming the old one. Any messages sent during the gap will be missed, unless channel persistence is enabled.

*Resolution*: Ensure that resume attempts occur within the two-minute window to successfully recover a connection. If message loss is a concern, enable channel persistence and use the "History API":/docs/api/realtime-sdk/history to retrieve missed messages.

h3(#80014). 80014: Connection timed out

This error occurs when a realtime "connection":/docs/connect/states#connection-states times out after waiting for the default 10-second @realtimeRequestTimeout@ in certain Ably SDKs.

The request will be automatically retried by the SDK.

*Resolution*: If the client never connects to the "primary or fallback endpoints":https://faqs.ably.com/routing-around-network-and-dns-issues, check any firewall rules that may be blocking access to Ably's "endpoints":https://faqs.ably.com/if-i-need-to-whitelist-ablys-servers-from-a-firewall-which-ports-ips-and/or-domains-should-i-add.

h3(#80016). 80016: Operation on superseded connection

This error occurs when a browser "connection":/docs/connect/states#connection-states upgrades from an HTTP (Comet) transport to WebSockets. It is logged by the client library when operations are performed on the older transport.

*Resolution*: the following steps can help resolve this issue:
* If this error only appears in logs, it is harmless and does not affect your application. No action is needed.
* If you receive this error as a response to a request, contact Ably support with relevant logs and details, and they will investigate the issue.

h3(#80017). 80017: Connection closed

This error occurs when a "connection":/docs/connect/states#connection-states has been closed and an operation is attempted on it, such as calling a channel or presence method, for example, @channel.presence.update@ while the connection is still in a closed state.

*Resolution*: The following steps can help resolve this issue:
* Check the client's connection state before performing operations to ensure the connection is active.
* If the connection is closed, reconnect before making requests to avoid this error.

h3(#80018). 80018: Invalid connection ID (invalid format)

This error occurs when an invalid @connectionID@ is supplied. This is unexpected and may indicate a problem with the client's "connection":/docs/connect/states#connection-states state.

*Resolution*: The following steps can help resolve this issue:
* Upgrade to the latest version of the SDK to ensure the connection lifecycle is properly managed and valid connection IDs are used.
* If you are seeing resumes failing in ably-js, this was a known bug in ably-js versions 1.2.30 through 1.2.33. Upgrading to the latest version of ably-js should resolve the issue.

h3(#80019). 80019: Auth server rejecting request

This error occurs when the client library fails to obtain a token using the client-supplied "@authUrl@":/docs/auth/token#auth-url or "@authCallback@":/docs/auth/token#auth-callback. It is raised when the request to the authentication server fails due to an error or exception in the callback.

h3(#80020). 80020: Continuity loss due to maximum subscribe message rate exceeded

This error occurs when a client exceeds the "outbound":/docs/pricing/limits#connection subscribe message rate on a realtime connection.

*Resolution*: The following steps can help resolve this issue:
* The subscriber will receive an @UPDATE@ "channel state change":/docs/channels/states#connection-state event, indicating that continuity is lost.
* Use the @resumed@ flag to determine whether to recover missing messages or handle the failure accordingly.

h3(#80021). 80021: Max new connections rate exceeded

This error occurs when the maximum allowed rate of new connections for an account has been "exceeded":/docs/pricing/limits#hitting.

h3(#80022). 80022: Unable to find connection

This error can occur when using Comet transport, where a @send@ or @recv@ request is sent to the system but reaches a different frontend instance than the one hosting the connection. This can happen due to a disruption on a frontend instance.

*Resolution*: This is a non-fatal error, and no action is required. The transport will automatically drop and be re-initiated without any need for manual intervention.

h3(#80023). 80023: Unable to resume connection from a different site

This error occurs when a disconnected client attempts to resume a "connection":/docs/channels/states#connection-state from a different site than the original connection. This typically happens when a client tries to resume via a fallback host.

*Resolution*: Channel message continuity will not be possible in this scenario. Any messages sent while the client was disconnected will need to be retrieved using "History":/docs/storage-history/history#retrieve-channel.

h3(#40311). 40311: Operation requires TLS connection

By default, Ably apps require "TLS":/docs/account/app/settings#channel-rule-configuration for connections. This error occurs when a realtime SDK attempts to connect with TLS disabled (tls: false) while using token authentication.

*Resolution*: The following steps can help resolve this issue:
* Ensure that the @tls@ "@ClientOption@":/docs/api/realtime-sdk?#client-options is set to true when connecting.
* If using "API key":/docs/account/app/api#create authentication, note that this scenario will result in a "@40103@":#40103 error instead.

h2(#channel). Channel errors

h3(#90001). 90001: Channel operation failed (invalid channel state)

This error occurs when an application attempts to perform an operation on a channel that is in a "state":/docs/channels/states#connection-state that does not permit it.

An example of this error is when an application tries to "publish":/channels#publish a message or attach to a channel that is in a failed state due to a prior error. As a result, the operation fails because actions cannot be performed on a channel in this state.

*Resolution*: The following steps can help resolve this issue:
* Ensure the channel is in an appropriate state before performing any operations.
* Use Ably's client libraries to listen for channel state changes and handle operations accordingly.
* Implement state change callbacks to trigger the intended operation when the channel is in a valid "state":/channels#listen-for-state.

h3(#90004). 90004: Unable to recover channel (message limit exceeded)

This error occurs when using the rewind feature with a specified time period, and the total number of messages within the selected timeframe exceeds the maximum "limit":/docs/channels/options/rewind#limits that can be retrieved in a single request.

h3(#90007). 90007: Channel didn't attach within 00:00:10

This error occurs when a channel fails to "attach":/docs/channels/states#attach within the default 10-second timeout. It is most commonly encountered by clients with poor internet connections, where the @ACK@ response to an @ATTACH@ request does not return within the expected timeframe.

Note: In older versions of the ably-java SDK, this error was incorrectly assigned to error code @91200@.

*Resolution*: The following steps can help resolve this issue:
* If you expect slow network conditions, consider increasing the timeout value.
* Adjust the @realtimeRequestTimeout@ or @channelRetryTimeout@ (depending on the SDK) to a higher value to allow more time for the attachment process.
* Modify ably-js "timeout":https://faqs.ably.com/how-to-adjust-the-realtimerequesttimeout-to-a-higher-value-on-ably-js settings.

h3(#90010). 90010: Maximum number of channels per connection exceeded

This error occurs when a Realtime client "attaches":/docs/channels/states#attach to more channels than the account allows on a single connection. This happens when channels are attached but never explicitly detached, causing the limit to be reached.

*Resolution*: The following steps can help resolve this issue:
* Review your channel usage and ensure that channels are explicitly detached when no longer needed.
* Refer to the support article "Is there a maximum number of channels per connection?":https://faqs.ably.com/is-there-a-maximum-number-of-channels-per-connection”

h3(#91003). 91003: Maximum member limit exceeded

This error occurs when the maximum member "limit":/docs/pricing/limits#channel for a channel has been exceeded, preventing additional clients from joining.

An example of this error is An application attempting to add a new client to the "presence":/docs/presence-occupancy/presence set of a channel, but the presence member limit for example, 100 members for the current subscription plan, has already been reached. The error prevents the additional client from joining.

*Resolution:* Use "batching":/channels#batch-publish to optimize how presence messages are sent and received. This can help reduce the number of individual presence updates on the channel. You can also check your channel "limits":g/pricing/limits to understand the presence limits for your current plan.

h3(#90021). 90021: Max channel creation rate exceeded

This error occurs when the "maximum":/docs/pricing/limits#channel allowed rate of channel creation for an account has been exceeded. Until the rate returns below the limit, new channels may not be created immediately. The Ably SDK will automatically retry every 10 seconds until the request succeeds.

h3(#91000). 91000: Unable to enter presence channel (no clientId)

This error occurs when a client attempts to "enter":/docs/chat/rooms/presence#set the "presence":/docs/presence-occupancy/presence set of a channel without specifying a clientId.

A client can be identified in several ways:
* If using "token":/docs/auth/token authentication, ensure the token is associated with a clientId by setting the clientId field in @tokenParams@ when creating a token request or requesting a token.
* If using basic authentication or token authentication with a wildcard clientId, set the clientId in the client options when initializing the Ably SDK.
* If the client remains unidentified, specify a clientId at the time of entering presence using @enterClient()@.

h3(#91003). 91003: Maximum member limit exceeded

This error occurs when the "maximum":/docs/pricing/limits#hitting number of clients in the "presence":/docs/presence-occupancy/presence set for a channel has been reached, preventing additional clients from joining.

h3(#91005). 91005: Presence state is out of sync

This is a client-side issue that occurs when an up-to-date "presence":/docs/presence-occupancy/presence set cannot be retrieved due to connection issues. It typically happens when calling @presence.get()@ while the channel is in a suspended state, often caused by an interruption in the client's internet connection.

*Resolution*: The following steps can help resolve this issue:
* Ensure the client has an active connection before calling @presence.get()@.
* If an outdated presence set is acceptable, set @waitForSync@: false to retrieve the presence data even when out of sync.

h2(#integration). Integration errors

h3(#70001). 70001: Reactor operation failed (POST operation returned unexpected code)

This error occurs when a Reactor rule fails due to an issue with the configured endpoint. Ably attempts to send a POST request, but the response is unexpected or unsuccessful.

h3(#70002). 70002: Reactor operation failed (POST operation returned unexpected code)

This error occurs when Ably sends a webhook to your server, but the server refuses or returns an unexpected response code. While Ably will retry the request multiple times, repeated failures indicate an issue on the server side.

h3(#72000). 72000: Ingress operation failed

This error occurs due to an internal error with the ingress worker. It is an unexpected issue that happens when the worker attempts to execute a rule but encounters an error during the process.

h3(#72002). 72002: Ingress table is unhealthy

This error occurs when the rule worker is unable to access or retrieve data from either the "outbox":/docs/livesync/postgres#outbox-table or "nodes":/docs/livesync/postgres#nodes-table table in the database as expected.

An example of this error is misconfigurations in the database setup or inconsistencies between the provided configuration and the actual database schema or table names.

*Resolution*: The following steps can help resolve this issue:
* Verify the configuration of the outbox and nodes tables in the database to ensure they are correctly set up and match the rule definition.
* Check for database connectivity issues and confirm that the database is accessible.
* Ensure that the schema and table names align with the expected configuration.

h3(#72004). 72004: Ingress cannot identify channel, no _ablyChannel field

This error occurs when a "MongoDB Change Stream":https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/changeStreams/#change-streams event does not contain the required @_ablyChannel@ field after being processed through the Change Stream pipeline. This field is essential for identifying the channel where the change event message will be published.

*Resolution*: The following steps can help resolve this issue:
* Ensure that the @_ablyChannel@ field is present at the root level of the change event.
* Avoid nesting it inside other sections, such as @$fullDocument._ablyChannel@.
* The field must be part of the main structure of the change event to allow proper identification.

h3(#72005). 72005: Ingress invalid pipeline

This error occurs when the "MongoDB Change Stream":https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/changeStreams/#change-streams fails to start due to an invalid pipeline. An example of this error is when the pipeline syntax does not conform to MongoDB's requirements or contains unrecognized operators.

*Resolution*: The following steps can help resolve this issue:
* Review the pipeline syntax for errors and ensure all operators are valid.
* Adjust the pipeline to match MongoDB's accepted structure and syntax guidelines.

h3(#72006). 72006: Unable to resume from change stream

This error occurs when the "MongoDB Change Stream":https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/changeStreams/#change-streams cannot be resumed because the resume token document stored in MongoDB is not in the correct format.

*Resolution*: The following steps can help resolve this issue:
* Verify the format of the stored resume token document in MongoDB.
* Ensure the token meets the expected structure and format required for MongoDB Change Stream resumption.
* Refer to the MongoDB documentation for guidelines on properly storing and using resume tokens.

h3(#72007). 72007: Unable to store change stream resume token

This error occurs when the "MongoDB Change Stream":https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/changeStreams/#change-streams resume token cannot be stored in the @ably@ collection of the database.

*Resolution*: The following steps can help resolve this issue:
* Verify that the integration rule and MongoDB connection string are correctly configured.
* Ensure the database user has the necessary read and write permissions for the @ably@ collection.
* Adjust permissions if needed to allow the token to be successfully stored.

h2(#push). Push notification errors

h3(#40015). 40015: Invalid device ID

This error occurs when the ID property in a "DeviceDetails":/docs/api/rest-sdk/push-admin#device-details object, sent during a push notification registration request, is invalid. The ID must be a string.

h3(#61002). 61002: Activation failed: Present clientId is not compatible with existing device registration

This error occurs when you previously "activated":/configure/device#activate-devices a device for push notifications with a specific @clientId@, but then changed the @clientId@ used for authentication. The mismatch causes the error because the push notification setup tracks the @clientId@ and other details to prevent accidental changes between app launches. The @clientId@ is linked to registrations, such as subscribing by @clientId@.

An example of this error is when push notifications are activated with a "@DeviceDetails@":/docs/api/realtime-sdk/push-admin#device-details object tied to a @clientId@ for a client device. After authenticating with a new @clientId@, an error occurs when the device tries to register again due to incompatible @DeviceDetails@ between the original and new @clientId@.

*Resolution:* If you need to change your client's @clientId@, deactivate and reactivate the device. This process triggers an internal @device.reset()@ call, which clears and resets the old device details.

h2(#space). Spaces errors

h3(#101000). 101000: Space name missing

This error occurs when "calling":/docs/spaces/space#options @spaces.get()@ without specifying a space name. The name parameter is required to retrieve a space.

*Resolution*: Ensure that a valid space name is provided when calling @spaces.get()@:

```[javascript]
const space = await spaces.get('mySpaceName');
```

h3(#101001). 101001: Not entered space

This error occurs when "calling":/docs/spaces/space#options a function that requires the client to be entered into a space, but the client has not yet done so.

*Resolution*: Ensure that @space.enter()@ is called before performing operations that require the client to be inside the space:

```[javascript]
const space = await spaces.get('mySpace');
space.enter({
  username: 'Claire Lemons',
  avatar: 'https://slides-internal.com/users/clemons.png',
});
```

h3(#101002). 101002: Lock request exists

This error occurs when an existing "lock request":/docs/spaces/locking#states is still pending or locked. Nested locks are not supported, so a new lock cannot be requested until the previous one is resolved.

h3(#101003). 101003: Lock is locked

This error occurs when a lock is already in the "locked state":/docs/spaces/locking#states, and a pending request did not override or release the lock.

h3(#101004). 101004: Lock invalidated

This error occurs when a "lock request":/docs/spaces/locking#states invalidates an existing lock that was already in the locked state.

h2(#api). Control API errors

h3(#40022). 40022: Invalid resource

This error occurs when the requested resource is invalid or already exists. It is typically returned by requests to the "Control API":/docs/account/control-api.

Examples of this error include attempting to create a resource that already exists or providing an invalid resource name.

*Resolution*: The following steps can help resolve this issue:
* Ensure that an app with the requested name does not already exist in your account. If it does, use a different name.
* Verify that the "capabilities":/docs/auth/capabilities#capability-operations listed in the request are valid when creating an API key.
