---
title: Error handling
meta_description: "Error handling in Ably supported apps, including troubleshooting techniques, logging options, and tools for debugging."
---

Errors can occur in various scenarios when using Ably, such as "invalid inputs":/error-handling/error-codes#errors in requests, authentication issues, or connection problems caused by network disruptions. Proper error handling is essential for building a reliable application and troubleshooting.

* Set up a custom log handler to capture and manage errors in a way that suits your requirements.
* Meta channels allow you to monitor errors that might not otherwise be visible to clients, providing additional insights into issues.
* The Dev console in your Ably "dashboard":https://ably.com/accounts/any is a quick and easy way to inspect errors and events, especially during development or debugging.

Common errors in Ably-supported apps usually arise from:

- *Authentication issues* := Invalid or expired tokens, incorrect API keys.
- *Permission errors* := Missing or insufficient capabilities for publishing or subscribing.
- *Channel attachment failures* := Incorrect channel names, network connectivity problems, or unauthorized access.

h2.(#format) Error format

All errors returned by Ably are standardized and use the @ErrorInfo@ object:

```[text]
{
  code: 40005,
  statusCode: 400,
  cause: Authentication,
  nonfatal: false,
  href: 'https://help.ably.io/error/40005'
}
```

The following explains each property of an @ErrorInfo@ object:

- *code* := Ably-specific numeric code indicating the error type.
- *statusCode* := An HTTP status code providing broader context, such as 400 for a bad request.
- *cause* := A brief description of the issue.
- *nonfatal* := A boolean indicating whether the error is critical.
- *Href* := A direct link to Ably's documentation or for quick troubleshooting references.

h2(#logging). Logging

Most Ably SDKs allow you to customize the function that handles logging. This function is usually set in the options when configuring a client, such as the @ClientOptions@ object for Pub/Sub.

Two separate properties can be set:

- *logHandler* :=  Provide a custom function for each line of log output.
- *logLevel* := The verbosity of the logging output, from silent to trace. In some SDKs this is numeric, and in others string.

The following example configures the Ably client to log only error messages (level 1) and processes them with the function @logWriteFun()@:

```[text]
const ablyClient = new AblyClient(ably, {
  logHandler: logWriteFunc,
  logLevel: 1 // Errors only
});
```

The following is an example log entry:

```[text]
LOG [Level 1]: Ably: ConnectionManager.failQueuedMessages(): failing 1 queued messages, err = [_ErrorInfo: Application Ptz0jg disabled.
(See https://help.ably.io/error/40300 for help.); statusCode=403; code=40300]
```

h2(#meta). [meta]log channels

Errors are not published in the meta channels when the client can be directly notified. For example, if a client publishes a message but exceeds a channel rate limit, the @publish()@ method uses an error callback to notify the client.

There are two @metachannels@ related to logging:

- @Meta[log]@ := Publishes errors that aren't visible to clients, except those related to push notifications.

- @Meta[log:push]@ := Similar to @[meta]log@, but only publishes errors related to the delivery of push notifications.

The following example subscribes to the @[meta]log@ channel:

```[text]
const channel = realtime.channels.get('[meta]log');
channel.subscribe((msg) => {
  console.log(msg);
});
```

The following is an example event published to the @[meta]log@ channel as an @ErrorInfo@ object:

```[text]
{
  code: 40005,
  statusCode: 400,
  cause: Authentication,
  nonfatal: false,
  href: 'https://help.ably.io/error/40005'
}
```

h2(#console). Dev console

The Dev console, accessible from your Ably dashboard, is essential for inspecting and debugging realtime errors. It visually displays all events in your application, making it particularly valuable during early-stage development or low-traffic periods when event tracking is simpler:

* View all events in your application for detailed insights.
* Test publishing and subscribing to channels to identify and resolve issues with these functions.

h3(#connections). Connections

Monitor state changes for example; connecting, connected, closed to identify authentication or network issues. Regularly review logs to ensure consistency and address potential problems:

* Verify channels pause and resume as expected, with active and functioning subscriptions.
* Simulate disconnection events and validate reconnection logic to ensure seamless recovery.
* Align timestamps with reported issues to trace root causes and spot patterns.

h3(channels). Channels

Address common issues such as attachment failures and undelivered messages:

* Confirm the channel name and client initialization are correct. Ensure API key permissions allow the operation.
* Verify the channel is attached and message data meets API requirements.
* Check the @clientId@ configuration and validate the API integration using REST API commands.



