---
title: Deprecation of protocol version 1 - November 2025
meta_description: "A policy detailing how Ably deprecates SDKs and APIs."
meta_keywords: "Ably, deprecation policy, deprecation, sunset"
---

SDKs using version 1 of Ably's realtime protocol will be sunset on 1st November 2025.

This version was superseded by version 2 in January 2023. It introduced new functionality, with a more efficient and scalable backend implementation. New features are not available using version 1 of the protocol, nor in any SDKs implementing it.

h2(#sdks). Affected SDKs

SDK versions earlier than those listed below are now considered deprecated. If you are using a version older than those listed, upgrade before the 1st November 2025.

|_. Product |_. Language |_. Versions |
| Pub/Sub | JavaScript | < "1.2.36":https://github.com/ably/ably-js/releases/tag/1.2.36 |
| Pub/Sub | Java | < "1.2.35":https://github.com/ably/ably-java/releases/tag/v1.2.35 |
| Pub/Sub | Swift / Objective-C | < "1.2.24":https://github.com/ably/ably-cocoa/releases/tag/1.2.24 |
| Pub/Sub | .NET | < "1.2.12":https://github.com/ably/ably-dotnet/releases/tag/1.2.12 |
| Pub/Sub | Go | < "1.2.14":https://github.com/ably/ably-go/releases/tag/v1.2.14 |
| Pub/Sub | Python | < "2.0.0-beta.6":https://github.com/ably/ably-python/releases/tag/v2.0.0-beta.6 |
| Pub/Sub | Ruby | < "1.2.5":https://github.com/ably/ably-ruby/releases/tag/v1.2.5 |
| Pub/Sub | PHP | < "1.1.9":https://github.com/ably/ably-php/releases/tag/1.1.9 |
| Pub/Sub | Flutter | < "1.2.25":https://github.com/ably/ably-flutter/releases/tag/v1.2.25 |
| Kafka Connect | - | < "2.1.4":https://github.com/ably/kafka-connect-ably/releases/tag/v2.1.4 |

Contact "support":https://ably.com/support if you have any questions.

h2(#requests). Request failures

On the 1st November 2025 attempts to connect to Ably using an SDK that uses version 1 of the protocol will start to fail. Failures will be phased, with only a fraction of traffic being rejected at first, until 100% of requests are rejected after several weeks.

Requests that are rejected will contain an error message and code referencing this deprecation notice and the associated "deprecation policy.":/docs/platform/deprecate
