---
title: Deprecation of TLS 1.0 and 1.1 - June 2025
meta_description: "A policy detailing how Ably is deprecating support for TLS 1.0 and 1.1."
meta_keywords: "Ably, deprecation policy, deprecation, sunset, TLS, security"
---

Support for TLS (Transport Layer Security) versions 1.0 and 1.1 will be sunset in June 2025.

As part of our ongoing commitment to ensuring the highest standards of security and performance, we are deprecating support for these older TLS versions across our service. After this date, all connections to our service must use TLS 1.2 or higher.

h2(#impact). Impact

After June 2025, requests using TLS 1.0 or 1.1 may be refused. This affects all connections to Ably's services, including:
* Real-time connections
* REST API calls
* WebSocket connections
* Any other service that communicates with Ably

h2(#error). Error Messages

When attempting to connect using TLS 1.0 or 1.1, you may receive a TLS protocol version error. The error message will reference `protocol_version` to indicate that the TLS version is not supported.

h2(#recommendations). Recommended actions

* **Verify compatibility:** Ensure that your systems, applications, and integrations are configured to support TLS 1.2 or higher.
* **Update legacy systems:** If you are using older platforms, consult with your IT team or integration partners to update any components that still rely on TLS 1.0 or 1.1.

For customers who have a custom environment or Active traffic management enabled, we can update your settings at any time.

h2(#requests). Request failures

From June 2025, attempts to connect to Ably using TLS 1.0 or 1.1 may start to fail. Failures will be phased, with only a fraction of traffic being rejected at first, until 100% of requests are rejected after several weeks.

Requests that are rejected will contain an error message and code referencing this deprecation notice and the associated "deprecation policy.":/docs/platform/deprecate

Contact "support":https://ably.com/support if you have any questions. 
