---
title: Push Notifications - Download
section: realtime
hide_from_nav: true
---

Ably's push notification service is currently in beta. As such, the client libraries currently have varying levels of support for push notifications.

Below is a table with the recent status of each library along with instructions on how to install each library. "Get in touch":https://www.ably.io/contact if a needed library is missing or you require any assistaance.

|_. Library |_. Status |_. Installation instructions |
| Android | Realtime & REST API 90% complete. Test coverage low | "See Github PR 308":https://github.com/ably/ably-java/pull/308 |
| Go | Not scheduled for release at present | See "alternative solution":#alternative below |
| iOS | Realtime & REST API 80% complete. Test coverage low | "See Github PR 582":https://github.com/ably/ably-ios/pull/582 |
| Java | Realtime & REST API 90% complete. Test coverage low | "See Github PR 308":https://github.com/ably/ably-java/pull/308 |
| Javascript | Realtime & REST API 75% complete. <br>Web Push not yet supported. Test coverage medium | "See Github PR 395":https://github.com/ably/ably-js/pull/395 |
| .NET | Not scheduled for release at present | See "alternative solution":#alternative below |
| Node.js | Realtime & REST API 75% complete. Test coverage medium | "See Github PR 395":https://github.com/ably/ably-js/pull/395 |
| PHP | Unavailable at present. To be released within weeks | See "alternative solution":#alternative below |
| Python | Unavailable at present. To be released within weeks | See "alternative solution":#alternative below |
| Ruby | REST API 100% complete. Test coverage high | "See Github PR 115":https://github.com/ably/ably-ruby/pull/115 |

h3(#alternative). How to use push notifications with an unsupported client library

As most of the functionality required to manage and publish push notifications is exposed using our "documented REST API":/rest-api, if we have not yet added push support to a client library you need, you have two options available to start using push notifications now anyway:

* Use our client library "request method":/rest/usage#request that is provided as a convenience for developers who wish to use bleeding edge REST API functionality without having to handle authentication, paging, fallback hosts, MsgPack and JSON support, etc. themselves. Refer to "REST API documentation":/rest-api for a list of push related endpoints
* Access the "REST API directly":/rest-api from your apps or servers

For example, in the Javascript / Node.js library you can obtain a "list of all registered devices":/rest-api#list-device-registrations using the "request method":/rest/usage#request as follows:

```[javascript]
var ably = new Ably.Rest({ key: key });
ably.request(
  'get',
  'push/deviceRegistrations',
  {limit: 100},
  null,
  null,
  function(err, response) {
    if(err) {
      console.log('An error occurred; err = ' + err.toString());
    } else {
      console.log('Success! status code was ' + response.statusCode);
      console.log(response.items.length + ' devices returned');
      if(response.hasNext()) {
        response.next(function(err, nextPage) {
          console.log(nextPage.items.length + ' more devices returned');
        });
      }
    }
  }
);
```

Please note that if you want to receive push notifications on a device using an Ably client library that does not yet support push notifications, then "please get in touch":https://www.ably.io/contact. Unfortunately, receiving push notifications is platform specific. As a result, adding support is far from trivial.
