- <span lang="default">authCallback</span><span lang="csharp,go">AuthCallback</span><span lang="python">auth_callback</span><span lang="ruby">:auth_callback</span> := A <span lang="default">function</span><span lang="javascript,nodejs">function with the form @function(tokenParams, callback(err, tokenOrTokenRequest))@</span><span lang="java">@TokenCallback@ instance</span><span lang="python">callable (eg a lambda)</span><span lang="ruby">proc / lambda (called synchronously in REST and Realtime but does not block EventMachine in the latter)</span> which is called when a new token is required. The role of the callback is to obtain a fresh token, one of: an Ably Token string (in plain text format); a signed "@TokenRequest@":/api/realtime-sdk/types#token-request ; a "@TokenDetails@":/api/realtime-sdk/types#token-details (in JSON format); an "Ably JWT":/api/realtime-sdk/authentication#ably-jwt. See "our authentication documentation":/rest/authentication for details of the Ably TokenRequest format and associated API calls.<br>__Type: <span lang="default">@Callable@</span><span lang="java">@TokenCallback@</span><span lang="ruby">@Proc@</span><span lang="csharp">@Func<TokenParams, Task<TokenDetails>>@</span>__

- <span lang="default">authUrl</span><span lang="csharp,go">AuthUrl</span><span lang="ruby">:auth_url</span><span lang="python">auth_url</span> := A URL that the library may use to obtain a fresh token, one of: an Ably Token string (in plain text format); a signed "@TokenRequest@":/api/realtime-sdk/types#token-request ; a "@TokenDetails@":/api/realtime-sdk/types#token-details (in JSON format); an "Ably JWT":/api/realtime-sdk/authentication#ably-jwt. For example, this can be used by a client to obtain signed Ably TokenRequests from an application server.<br>__Type: <span lang="default">@String@</span><span lang="csharp">@Uri@</span><span lang="swift,objc">@NSURL@</span>__

- <span lang="default">authMethod</span><span lang="csharp,go">AuthMethod</span><span lang="python">auth_method</span><span lang="ruby">:auth_method</span> := _<span lang="default">@GET@</span><span lang="ruby">@:get@</span>_ The HTTP verb to use for the request, either <span lang="default">@GET@</span><span lang="ruby">@:get@</span> or <span lang="default">@POST@</span><span lang="ruby">@:post@</span><br>__Type: <span lang="default">@String@</span><span lang="ruby">@Symbol@</span><span lang="csharp">@HttpMethod@</span>__

- <span lang="default">authHeaders</span><span lang="csharp,go">AuthHeaders</span><span lang="python">auth_headers</span><span lang="ruby">:auth_headers</span> := A set of key value pair headers to be added to any request made to the <span lang="default,javascript">@authUrl@</span><span lang="csharp">@AuthUrl@</span>. Useful when an application requires these to be added to validate the request or implement the response. <span lang="javascript">If the @authHeaders@ object contains an @authorization@ key, then @withCredentials@ will be set on the xhr request.</span><br>__Type: <span lang="default">@Object@</span><span lang="python">@Dict@</span><span lang="ruby">@Hash@</span><span lang="php">@Associative Array@</span><span lang="java">@Param []@</span><span lang="csharp">@Dictionary<string, string>@</span>__

- <span lang="default">authParams</span><span lang="csharp,go">AuthParams</span><span lang="ruby">:auth_params</span><span lang="python">auth_params</span> := A set of key value pair params to be added to any request made to the <span lang="default">@authUrl@</span><span lang="csharp">@AuthUrl@</span>. When the <span lang="default">@authMethod@</span><span lang="csharp,go">@AuthMethod@</span> is @GET@, query params are added to the URL, whereas when <span lang="default">@authMethod@</span><span lang="csharp,go">@AuthMethod@</span> is @POST@, the params are sent as URL encoded form data. Useful when an application require these to be added to validate the request or implement the response.<br>__Type: <span lang="default">@Object@</span><span lang="ruby">@Hash@</span><span lang="php">@Associative Array@</span><span lang="java">@Param[]@</span><span lang="csharp">@Dictionary<string, string>@</span><span lang="objc">@NSArray<NSURLQueryItem *>@</span><span lang="swift">@[NSURLQueryItem]/Array<NSURLQueryItem>@</span>__

- <span lang="default">tokenDetails</span><span lang="csharp,go">TokenDetails</span><span lang="python">token_details</span><span lang="ruby">:token_details</span> := An authenticated "@TokenDetails@":/api/realtime-sdk/types#token-details object (most commonly obtained from an Ably Token Request response). This option is mostly useful for testing: since tokens are short-lived, in production you almost always want to use an authentication method that allows the client library to renew the token automatically when the previous one expires, such as <span lang="default">@authUrl@</span><span lang="csharp,go">@AuthUrl@</span><span lang="ruby">@:auth_url@</span><span lang="python">@auth_url@</span> or <span lang="default">@authCallback@</span><span lang="csharp,go">AuthCallback</span><span lang="python">@auth_callback@</span><span lang="ruby">@:auth_callback@</span>. Use this option if you wish to use Token authentication. Read more about "Token authentication":/core-features/authentication#token-authentication<br>__Type: @TokenDetails@__
