---
title: Kafka rule
meta_description: "Ably allows you to send data to Kafka based on message, channel lifecycle, channel occupancy, and presence events."
meta_keywords: "Kafka, integrations, events, serverless"
languages:
  - none
redirect_from:
  - /general/firehose/kafka-rule
---

You can use a Kafka rule to send "data":/general/firehose#data-sources such as messages, occupancy, lifecycle and presence events from Ably to Kafka.

If you want to send data from Kafka to Ably, you can use the "Ably Kafka Connector":/general/kafka-connector, rather than Kafka rules.

h2(#creating-kafka-rule). Creating a Kafka rule

There are two ways to create a Kafka rule:

* Using the "Ably Dashboard":https://ably.com/dashboard.
* Using the "Control API":/account/control-api.

h3(#creating-rule-dashboard). Creating a Kafka rule in the dashboard

To create a rule in your "dashboard":https://ably.com/dashboard#58:

* Login and select the application you wish to integrate with Kafka.
* Click the *Integrations* tab.
* Click the *+ New Integration Rule* button.
* Choose Firehose.
* Choose Kafka.
* Configure the settings applicable to your use case and your Kafka installation.

In this section you need to set up your Authentication for Kafka by selecting your preferred mechanism for authentication and providing credentials.

The supported Authentication Mechanisms are:

* "SASL/PLAIN":https://docs.confluent.io/platform/current/kafka/authentication_sasl/authentication_sasl_plain.html#kafka-sasl-auth-plain
* "SASL/SCRAM-SHA-256":https://docs.confluent.io/platform/current/kafka/authentication_sasl/authentication_sasl_scram.html#kafka-sasl-auth-scram
* "SASL/SCRAM-SHA-512":https://docs.confluent.io/platform/current/kafka/authentication_sasl/authentication_sasl_scram.html

* Click *Create* to create the rule.

h3(#creating-rule-control-api). Creating a Kafka rule using Control API

See some examples of creating rules in the "rules section":/account/control-api#examples-rules of the Control API documentation. You can also refer to the "rule section":/api/control-api#tag/rules/paths/~1apps~1{app_id}~1rules/post of the Control API Reference for information on creating a Kafka rule. You will need to select a @ruleType@ of @kafka@.

h2(#see-also). See also

* "Firehose overview":/general/firehose
* "Control API overview":/account/control-api
* "Ably Kafka Connector":/general/kafka-connector
