---
title: Using the SDKs
section: asset-tracking
index: 20
meta_description: "Ably Asset Tracking SDKs provide an easy way to track multiple assets with realtime location updates powered by the Ably realtime network and Mapbox Navigation SDK with location enhancement."
meta_keywords: "Ably, Asset Tracking SDK, Mapbox, Mapbox Navigation SDK, Ably realtime, map matching, location tracking, Publishing SDK, Subscribing SDK"
languages:
  - kotlin
  - swift
  - javascript
jump_to:
  Help with:
    - Supported platforms#supported-platforms
    - SDK Repositories#repositories
    - Prerequisites#prerequisites
    - Installing the SDK#installing-sdk
    - Authentication#authentication
    - Using the Publishing SDK#publishing-sdk
    - Using the Subscribing SDK#subscribing-sdk
    - Location animator#location-animator
    - See also#see-also
---

This topic explains how to get started using the Ably Asset Tracking SDKs.

h2(#supported-platforms). Supported platforms

There are two Asset Tracking SDKs, one for publishing and one for subscribing. The following platforms are supported:

* Android (Java and Kotlin) - publisher and subscriber SDK
* iOS (Objective-C and Swift) - publisher and subscriber SDK
* Web (JavaScript, with first class TypeScript support) - subscriber SDK

h2(#repositories). SDK repositories

The SDKs can be found in the following GitHub repositories:

* "Android":https://github.com/ably/ably-asset-tracking-android
* "iOS":https://github.com/ably/ably-asset-tracking-swift
* "JavaScript":https://github.com/ably/ably-asset-tracking-js

h2(#prerequisites). Prerequisites

You need to have a suitable development environment installed, for example:

* Android - "Android Studio":https://developer.android.com/studio or "Gradle":https://gradle.org/ (requires Android SDK to be installed)
* iOS - "Xcode":https://developer.apple.com/xcode/
* JavaScript - any suitable environment of your choice

You also need to have suitable credentials for the various SDK components:

* @ABLY_API_KEY@ - Your Ably API key
* @MAPBOX_ACCESS_TOKEN@ - Mapbox public key
* @MAPBOX_DOWNLOADS_TOKEN@ - Mapbox private key

<span lang="android">On Android development systems you can set these values in your @~/.gradle/gradle.properties@ file.</span>

h2(#installing-sdk). Installing the SDK

You can find information on installing the Ably Asset Tracking SDKs in the following resources:

* "Instructions for Android":https://github.com/ably/ably-asset-tracking-android
* "Instructions for iOS":https://github.com/ably/ably-asset-tracking-swift
* "Instructions for JavaScript":https://github.com/ably/ably-asset-tracking-js

h2(#authentication). Authentication

blang[kotlin,javascript].
  The client requires authentication in order to establish a connection with Ably. There are three methods that can be used:

  1. Basic authentication
  2. Token authentication
  3. JWT authentication

  Usually a client will use either token or JWT authentication, as basic authentication would require exposing the API keys on the client.

  Examples of establishing a connection using the three methods are given in the following sections. While the examples shown are for either the Publishing or Subscribing SDK, you can use the same approach for both SDKs.

  h3(#basic-authentication). Basic Authentication

  The following example demonstrates establishing a connection using basic authentication:

  ```[kotlin]
  val publisher = Publisher.publishers() // get the Publisher builder in default state
    .connection(ConnectionConfiguration(Authentication.basic(CLIENT_ID, ABLY_API_KEY)))
  ```

  ```[javascript]
  const subscriber = new Subscriber({ key: 'ABLY_API_KEY' })
  ```

  This method should not be used on a client however, as it exposes the API key.

  You can read more about basic authentication in our "documentation":/auth/basic.

  h3(#token-authentication). Token Authentication

  The following example demonstrates establishing a connection using token authentication:

  ```[kotlin]
  val publisher = Publisher.publishers() // get the Publisher builder in default state
      .connection(ConnectionConfiguration(Authentication.tokenRequest(CLIENT_ID) { requestParameters ->
          // get TokenRequest from your server
          getTokenRequestFromAuthServer(requestParameters); // customer implements this function
          }))
  ```

  ```[javascript]
  /* authURL is the endpoint for your authentication server. It returns either
    a `TokenRequest` or a `Token` */
  const subscriber = new Subscriber({
    authUrl: 'http://my.website/auth',
    clientId: 'CLIENT_ID'
  })
  ```

  You can read more about token authentication in our "documentation":/auth/token.

  h3(#jwt-authentication). JWT Authentication

  The following example demonstrates establishing a connection using JWT authentication:

  ```[kotlin]
  val publisher = Publisher.publishers() // get the Publisher builder in default state
    .connection(ConnectionConfiguration(Authentication.jwt(CLIENT_ID) { tokenParameters ->
          // get JWT from your server
          getJWTFromAuthServer(tokenParameters); // customer implements this function
          }))
  ```

  ```[javascript]
  // authURL is the endpoint for your authentication server. It returns a JWT
  const subscriber = new Subscriber({
    authUrl: 'http://my.website/auth',
    clientId: 'CLIENT_ID'
  })
  ```

  You can read more about JWT authentication in our "documentation":/auth/token#jwt.

blang[swift].
  The client requires authentication in order to establish a connection with Ably. Currently, the Swift SDK only supports "basic authentication":/auth/basic, you authenticate with your Ably API key (available in "your account dashboard":https://ably.com/accounts) and can optionally "identify the client with a client ID":/auth/identified-clients. The following example demonstrates how to achieve this:

  ```[swift]
  let publisher = try PublisherFactory.publishers() // get a Publisher builder
  .connection(ConnectionConfiguration(apiKey: ABLY_API_KEY,
                                      clientId: CLIENT_ID))
  /* Any additional configuration */
  .start()
  ```

blang[kotlin,swift].
  h2(#publishing-sdk). Using the Publishing SDK

  Common operations you need to carry out on the publisher include:

  * Initialize the publisher.
  * Start tracking an asset.
  * Stop tracking an asset.
  * Set the resolution constraints on an asset.

  h3(#publisher-initializing). Initializing the Publisher

  During initialization of the publisher various methods can be called to configure the @Builder@ interface of the @Publisher@.

  The required methods are:

  - connection := Called to provide Ably connection information, such as API keys, and any other configuration parameters as needed.
  - map := Called to provide Mapbox configuration, such as API keys, any other configuration parameters as needed.
  - androidContext := Called to provide the Android runtime context (on Android only).
  - resolutionPolicy := Sets the policy factory to be used to define the target resolution for publishers created from this builder.
  - backgroundTrackingNotificationProvider := Sets the notification that will be displayed for the background tracking service. Please note that this notification will be removed when you call the @stop@ method (on Android only).
  - start := Creates a @Publisher@ and starts publishing. The returned publisher instance does not start in a state whereby it is actively tracking anything. If tracking is required from the outset then the @Publisher.track@ or @Publisher.add@ method must be subsequently called. In order to detect the device's location @ACCESS_COARSE_LOCATION@ or @ACCESS_FINE_LOCATION@ permission must be granted.

  The optional methods are:

  - profile := Called to set the means of transport being used for the initial state of publishers created from this builder. If not set then the default value is @RoutingProfile.DRIVING@.
  - locationSource := Sets the location source to be used instead of the GPS. The location source provides location updates for the @Publisher@.
  - logHandler := Sets the log handler (experimental API).
  - rawLocations := Enables sending of raw location updates. This should only be enabled for diagnostics. In the production environment this should be always disabled. By default this is disabled (experimental API). 
  - sendResolution := Enables sending of calculated resolutions. By default this is enabled. 
  - rawHistoryDataCallback := Specifies a callback that will be called with the filepath of raw history data from the Navigation SDK component. This will be probably removed in the future. Do not use this in the production environment (experimental API).
  - constantLocationEngineResolution := Enables using a constant location engine resolution. If the @resolution@ is not null then instead of using @ResolutionPolicy@ to calculate a dynamic resolution for the location engine the @resolution@ will be used as the location engine resolution. If the @resolution@ is null then the constant resolution is disabled and the location engine resolution will be calculated by the @ResolutionPolicy@. By default this is disabled.
  - vehicleProfile := Set the type of vehicle being used by the publisher user. If not set then the default value is @VehicleProfile.CAR@.

  Other publisher methods of note are:

  - track := Adds a @Trackable@ object and makes it the actively tracked object, meaning that the state of the @active@ field will be updated to this object, if that wasn't already the case. If this object was already in this publisher's tracked set then this method only serves to change the actively tracked object. This method returns a @StateFlow@ that represents the @TrackableState@ of the added @Trackable@.
  - add := Adds a @Trackable@ object, but does not make it the actively tracked object, meaning that the state of the @active@ field will not change. If this object was already in this publisher's tracked set then this method does nothing. This method returns a @StateFlow@ that represents the @TrackableState@ of the added @Trackable@.
  - remove := Removes a @Trackable@ object if it is known to this publisher, otherwise does nothing and returns false. If the removed object is the current actively @active@ object then that state will be cleared, meaning that for another object to become the actively tracked delivery then the @track@ method must be subsequently called.
  - getTrackableState := Returns a trackable state flow representing the @TrackableState@ for an already added @Trackable@.
  - stop := Stops this publisher from publishing locations. Once a publisher has been stopped, it cannot be restarted. Please note that calling this method will remove the notification provided by @Builder.backgroundTrackingNotificationProvider@.
  
  Publisher properties of note:
  
  - active := The actively tracked object, being the @Trackable@ object whose destination will be used for location enhancement, if available. This state can be changed by calling the @track@ method.
  - routingProfile := The active means of transport for this publisher.
  - locations := The shared flow emitting location values when they become available.
  - trackables := The shared flow emitting all trackables tracked by the publisher.
  - locationHistory := The shared flow emitting trip location history when it becomes available.

  In the following sections you will learn how to set up some resolution constraints and then start publishing.

  The following code example creates some example "resolution constraints":/asset-tracking#resolution-constraints:

  ```[kotlin]
  // Prepare Resolution Constraints for an asset that will be used in the Resolution Policy
  val exampleConstraints = DefaultResolutionConstraints(
      DefaultResolutionSet( // this constructor provides one Resolution for all states
          Resolution(
              accuracy = Accuracy.BALANCED,
              desiredInterval = 1000L,
              minimumDisplacement = 1.0
          )
      ),
      proximityThreshold = DefaultProximity(spatial = 1.0),
      batteryLevelThreshold = 10.0f,
      lowBatteryMultiplier = 2.0f
  )
  ```

  ```[swift]
  let resolution = Resolution(accuracy: .balanced,
                              desiredInterval: 1000,
                              minimumDisplacement: 1.0)
  let resolutions = DefaultResolutionSet(resolution: resolution)
  let proximityThreshold = DefaultProximity(spatial: 1)
  let exampleConstraints = DefaultResolutionConstraints(resolutions: resolutions,
                                                proximityThreshold: proximity,
                                                batteryLevelThreshold: 10,
                                                lowBatteryMultiplier: 2)
  ```

  The next step is create a default "resolution":/asset-tracking#resolution to be used:

  ```[kotlin]
  // Prepare the default resolution for the Resolution Policy
  val defaultResolution = Resolution(Accuracy.BALANCED,
                                     desiredInterval = 1000L,
                                     minimumDisplacement = 1.0)
  ```

  ```[swift]
  // Prepare the default resolution for the Resolution Policy
  let defaultResolution = Resolution(accuracy: .balanced,
                              desiredInterval: 1000,
                              minimumDisplacement: 1.0)
  ```

  Once these are created you can then initialize the publisher with the constraints and default resolution, and start the publisher:

  ```[kotlin]
  // Initialize and Start the Publisher
  val publisher = Publisher.publishers() // get the Publisher builder in default state
    // Required configuration
    .connection(ConnectionConfiguration(Authentication.basic(CLIENT_ID, ABLY_API_KEY))) // provide Ably configuration with credentials
    .map(MapConfiguration(MAPBOX_ACCESS_TOKEN)) // provide Mapbox configuration with credentials
    .androidContext(this) // provide Android runtime context
    .resolutionPolicy(DefaultResolutionPolicyFactory(defaultResolution, this)) // provide either the default resolution policy factory or your custom implementation
    .backgroundTrackingNotificationProvider(
      object : PublisherNotificationProvider {
        override fun getNotification(): Notification {
            // TODO: create the notification for location updates background service
        }
      },
      NOTIFICATION_ID
    )
    // Optional configuration
    .profile(RoutingProfile.DRIVING) // provide mode of transportation for better location enhancements
    .logHandler(object : LogHandler {
        override fun logMessage(level: LogLevel, message: String, throwable: Throwable?) {
          // TODO: log the message to internal or external loggers
        }
      })
    .rawLocations(false) // send raw location updates to subscribers
    .sendResolution(true) // send calculated trackable network resolution to subscribers
    .constantLocationEngineResolution(constantLocationEngineResolution) // provide a constant resolution for the GPS engine
    .vehicleProfile(VehicleProfile.CAR) // provide vehicle type for better location enhancements
    .locationSource(LocationSourceRaw.create(historyData)) // use an alternative location source for GPS locations
    // Create and start the publisher
    .start()
  ```

  ```[swift]
  // Initialise and start the Publisher
  let publisher = try PublisherFactory.publishers() // get a Publisher Builder
    .connection(ConnectionConfiguration(apiKey: ABLY_API_KEY,
                                        clientId: CLIENT_ID)) // provide Ably configuration with credentials
    .log(LogConfiguration()) // provide logging configuration
    .transportationMode(TransportationMode()) // provide mode of transportation for better location enhancements
    .delegate(self) // provide delegate to handle location updates locally if needed
    .start()
  ```

h3(#publisher-start-tracking). Start tracking

blang[kotlin].
  You can start tracking an asset (a @Trackable@), by calling the @track@ or @add@ method of the publisher. A @Trackable@ is composed of the following:

  - trackingID := The tracking identifier for the asset.
  - destination := A @Destination@ object, which is a latitude and longitude.
  - constraints := A set of resolution constraints.
  
  The @track@ method adds a @Trackable@ object, and makes it the actively tracked object, meaning that the state of the @active@ field will be updated to this object, if that wasn't already the case. If this object was already in this publisher's tracked set, then this method only serves to change the actively tracked object. Takes a @trackable@ as a parameter, which is the object to be added to this publisher's tracked set, if it's not already there, and which will be made the actively tracked object.

  The @add@ method adds a @Trackable@ object, but does not make it the actively tracked object, meaning that the state of the @active@ field will not change. If this object was already in this publisher's tracked set then this method does nothing. Takes a @trackable@ as a parameter, which is the object to be added to this publisher's tracked set, if it's not already there.

  Both of these methods return a @StateFlow@ that represents the @TrackableState@ of the added @Trackable@.  
  
blang[swift].
  You can start tracking an asset by calling the @track@ method of the publisher. You need to supply the tracking identifier of the asset to be tracked and the completion handler.

The following code example demonstrates how to start tracking an asset:

```[kotlin]
// Start tracking an asset
try {
    publisher.track(
        Trackable(
            trackingId, // provide a tracking identifier for the asset
            destination, // provide a destination as a latitude and longitude
            constraints = exampleConstraints // provide a set of Resolution Constraints
        )
    )
    // TODO handle asset tracking started successfully
} catch (exception: Exception) {
    // TODO handle asset tracking could not be started
}
```

```[swift]
// Start tracking an asset with its tracking ID
publisher.track(trackable: trackable) { [weak self] result in
    switch result {
    case .success:
        self?.trackables = [trackable]
        logger.info("Initial trackable tracked successfully.")
    case .failure(let error):
        logger.info("Unable to track trackable.")
    }
}
```

h3(#publisher-stop-tracking). Stop tracking

You can stop tracking a trackable (asset) that is registered with the publisher using the @remove@ method, as shown in the following code:

```[kotlin]
publisher.remove(trackable)
```

```[swift]
publisher.remove(trackable)
```

h2(#subscribing-sdk). Using the Subscribing SDK

Common operations you will need to carry out on the subscriber include:

* Initialize the subscriber.
* Listen for location updates sent from from the publisher.
* Listen for asset status updates sent from the publisher.
* Request a different resolution to be sent from the publisher.

h3(#subscriber-initializing-sdk). Initializing the Subscriber

blang[kotlin,swift].
  During initialization of the subscriber various methods can be called to configure the @Subscriber@.

  The required methods are:

  - connection := Called to provide Ably connection information, such as API keys, and any other configuration parameters as needed.
  - trackingId := Sets the asset to be tracked, using the unique tracking identifier of the asset.

  The optional methods are:

  - resolution := Request a specific resolution of updates to be requested from the remote publisher.
  - logHandler := Sets the log handler (experimental API).
  - start := Creates a @Subscriber@ and starts listening for location updates.

  The following code example demonstrates initializing and starting the subscriber:

blang[javascript].
  Initialize the @Subscriber@ with a "@ClientOptions@":/api/rest-sdk#client-options object. You can also optionally configure event handlers for "location updates":#subscriber-subscribe and "asset state changes":#subscriber-subscribe-asset-state-changes during subscriber initialization.

  The following code example demonstrates initializing and starting the subscriber:

```[kotlin]
// Initialize and Start the Subscriber
val subscriber = Subscriber.subscribers() // Get an AssetSubscriber
    // Required configuration
    .connection(ConnectionConfiguration(Authentication.basic(CLIENT_ID, ABLY_API_KEY))) // provide Ably configuration with credentials
    .trackingId(trackingId) // provide the tracking identifier for the asset that needs to be tracked
    // Optional configuration
    .resolution( // request a specific resolution to be considered by the publisher
      Resolution(Accuracy.MAXIMUM, desiredInterval = 1000L, minimumDisplacement = 1.0)
    )
    .logHandler(object : LogHandler {
      override fun logMessage(level: LogLevel, message: String, throwable: Throwable?) {
        // TODO: log the message to internal or external loggers
      }
    })
    // Create and start the subscriber
    .start() // start listening for updates
```

```[swift]
// Initialize and start the subscriber
let subscriber = SubscriberFactory.subscribers()  // get a Subscriber builder
    .connection(ConnectionConfiguration(apiKey: ABLY_API_KEY,
                                        clientId: CLIENT_ID))  // connect to Ably
    .trackingId(trackingId)   // provide a Tracking ID for the asset to be tracked
    .routingProfile(.driving) // provide a routing profile for better location enhancements
    .log(LogConfiguration())  // provide logging configuration
    .resolution(Resolution(accuracy: .maximum,
                           desiredInterval: 10000,
                           minimumDisplacement: 500)) // request a specific resolution from the publisher
    .delegate(self) // provide a delegate to handle received location updates
    .start() // start listening to updates
```

```[javascript]
// Initialize the Subscriber
import { Subscriber, Accuracy } from '@ably/asset-tracking';

const ablyOptions = {
  key: 'ABLY_API_KEY',
  clientId: 'CLIENT_ID',
}

const subscriber = new Subscriber({
  ablyOptions,
  onLocationUpdate,   // optional
  onStatusUpdate,     // optional
})

// Start the subscriber, specifying the tracking identifier of the asset
await subscriber.start(trackingId)
```

h3(#subscriber-subscribe). Subscribe to updates

You can subscribe to updates from the publisher, specifying a function that is called when each update is received. This is shown in the following example:

```[kotlin]
// Listen for location updates
subscriber.locations
    .onEach { } // provide a function to be called when enhanced location updates are received
    .launchIn(scope) // coroutines scope on which the locations are received
```

```[swift]
// Override subscriber method of SubscriberDelegate to be notified of location updates
class MySubscriberDelegate: SubscriberDelegate {
  ...
  override func subscriber(sender: Subscriber, didUpdateEnhancedLocation location: CLLocation) {
    print("Location update received. Coordinates: \(location.coordinate)");
  }
  ...
}
```

```[javascript]
// Listen for location updates
subscriber.onLocationUpdate((locationUpdate) => {
  console.log(
    `Location update received. Coordinates: ${locationUpdate.location.geometry.coordinates}`
  )
})
```

You can also subscribe to raw locations if these have been enabled in the publisher (see the @rawLocations(true)@ builder method). Once the raw locations are enabled by the publisher, you can access them using the subscriber's @rawLocations@ flow, just as you do with the regular @locations@ flow. This feature is only ever used for debugging purposes, and should not be used in a production situation.

<span lang="javascript">Note that you can also configure the update event handler "during subscriber initialization":#subscriber-initializing-sdk.</span>

h3(#subscriber-subscribe-asset-state-changes). Subscribe to asset state changes

blang[kotlin,javascript].
  You can subscribe to asset state changes from the publisher, specifying a function that is called when each state change is received. This is shown in the following example:

  ```[kotlin]
  // Listen for asset state changes
  subscriber.trackableStates
      .onEach { } // provide a function to be called when the asset changes its state
      .launchIn(scope) // coroutines scope on which the statuses are received
  ```

  ```[javascript]
  // Listen for asset state changes
  subscriber.onLocationUpdate((isOnline) => {
    console.log(
      `Status update: Publisher is now ${isOnline ? 'online' : 'offline'}`
    )
  })
  ```


blang[swift].
  To listen to asset state change events from the publisher, you must provide a class that implements some or all of the methods in @SubscriberDelegate@:

  ```[swift]
  class MySubscriberDelegate: SubscriberDelegate {
    // Implement some or all of the delegate methods
    override func subscriber(sender: Subscriber, didChangeAssetConnectionStatus status: ConnectionState) {
        /* Handle the change */
    }

    override func subscriber(sender: Subscriber, didFailWithError error: ErrorInformation) {
        /* Handle the error */
    }

    override func subscriber(sender: Subscriber, didUpdateEnhancedLocation location: CLLocation) {
        /* Handle the location update */
    }
  }
  ```

  You can achieve this by using one of the following approaches:

  * Create a separate class that implements the required @SubscriberDelegate@, as shown in the example above. Reference that class by either:
    ** Setting @subscriber.delegate = MySubscriberDelegate()@ somewhere in your code.
    ** Passing this class to the @SubscribeFactory.delegate()@ method.
  * Implement the @SubscriberDelegate@ methods in your current class and specify @subscriber.delegate=self@.
  * Implement the @SubscriberDelegate@ methods as an "extension":https://docs.swift.org/swift-book/LanguageGuide/Extensions.html.


<span lang="javascript">Note that you can also configure the asset state change event handler "during subscriber initialization":#subscriber-initializing-sdk.</span>

h3(#request-a-different-resolution). Request a different resolution

blang[kotlin].
  The subscriber can always request a different resolution preference by calling the @resolutionPreference@ method, passing in the required @Resolution@. This is shown in the following example:

blang[swift].
  The subscriber can always request a different resolution preference by calling the @resolutionPreference@ method, passing in the required @Resolution@ and the completion handler. This is shown in the following example:

blang[javascript].
  The subscriber can request a different resolution by calling the @sendChangeRequest@ method, passing in the required @accuracy@, @desiredInterval@, and @minimumDisplacement@ property values. This is shown in the following example:

```[kotlin]
// Request a different resolution when needed.
try {
    subscriber.resolutionPreference(Resolution(Accuracy.MAXIMUM, desiredInterval = 100L, minimumDisplacement = 2.0))
    // TODO change request submitted successfully
} catch (exception: Exception) {
    // TODO change request could not be submitted
}
```

```[swift]
subscriber?.resolutionPreference(resolution: resolution) { [weak self] result in
    switch result {
    case .success:
        self?.currentResolution = resolution
        self?.updateResolutionLabel()
        logger.info("Updated resolution to: \(resolution)")
    case .failure(let error):
        let errorDescription = DescriptionsHelper.ResolutionStateHelper.getDescription(for: .changeError(error))
        self?.showErrorDialog(withMessage: errorDescription)
    }
}
```

```[javascript]
await subscriber.sendChangeRequest({
  accuracy: Accuracy.Low,
  desiredInterval: 3000,
  minimumDisplacement: 5,
})
```

blang[javascript].
  h3(#subscriber-subscribe-asset-state-changes). Stop receiving updates

  Stop receiving updates from the publisher by calling the @stop()@ method:

  ```[javascript]
  await subscriber.stop()
  ```

Subscriber properties that are useful include:

- resolutions := The shared flow emitting the publisher's resolution values when they become available.
- nextLocationUpdateIntervals := The shared flow emitting the estimated next location update intervals in milliseconds when they become available.

To observe the actual resolution, as opposed to the requested resolution:

```[kotlin]
subscriber.resolutions
  .onEach { publisherResolution -> }
  .launchIn(scope) 
```

For the smooth location animation mechanism a flow is exposed:

```[kotlin]
subscriber.nextLocationUpdateIntervals
  .onEach { interval -> }
  .launchIn(scope)
```

See also the SDK reference docs for more "Subscriber properties":https://sdk.ably.com/builds/ably/ably-asset-tracking-android/main/dokka/subscribing-sdk/subscribing-sdk/com.ably.tracking.subscriber/-subscriber/index.html.

h2(#location-animator). Location animator

The location animator is an extension for the subscriber that provides smooth location updates animation. 

The location animator creates animation steps from location updates that are provided by the Subscriber SDK. These steps are then applied to an ongoing animation. 

The animation duration is then recalculated as the sum of location update interval (the time to next location update from the publisher) and the intentional delay. The intentional delay allows for network issues or delays in the location updates. For example, if the intentional delay was set to two seconds, then a two second buffer will help the animation remain smooth and continuous, even if the publisher did not send a location update within the specified time, with a two second margin.

The location animator then recalculates each step duration to evenly take up the animation duration, so the overall animation of the trackable is smooth.

Each step is animated at 60 FPS, and this applies to the map marker.

More information can also be found in the location animator "reference docs":https://sdk.ably.com/builds/ably/ably-asset-tracking-android/main/dokka/ui-sdk/ui-sdk/com.ably.tracking.ui.animation/-location-animator/index.html.

h3(#location-animator-create-instance). Create an instance

Creating an instance of the location animator:

```[kotlin]
val locationAnimator: LocationAnimator = CoreLocationAnimator(
  intentionalAnimationDelayInMilliseconds,
  animationStepsBetweenCameraUpdates
) 
```

There are two optional parameters:

- intentionalAnimationDelayInMilliseconds := The higher the delay, the more buffer there is to allow for unexpected delays of location updates from the publisher. Also moves the actual position of the trackable backwards in time. The higher the setting the more network issues and delays are allowed for, but the position updates will be less realtime in nature. By default this is set to two seconds, but you should test what value works best for your use case.
- animationStepsBetweenCameraUpdates := By default, when a step is being animated, the camera position is also updated. But this can be changed so that the camera position updates, for example, on every five location updates.  

h3(#location-animator-stop). Stop the location animator

As with other components, you can stop the location animator with the @stop@ method:

```[kotlin]
locationAnimator.stop()
```

The location animator should be stopped when no longer used to conserve resources.

h3(#location-animator-observing-positions). Observing the animated positions

The location animator exposes a positions flow:

```[kotlin]
locationAnimator.positionsFlow
  .onEach { trackablePosition -> }
  .launchIn(scope)
```

This provides data you can use to move your map marker on the map, or when you want to move your trackable in the screen. This flow is updated at 60 FPS when the animation is ongoing.

A camera positions flow is also provided:

```[kotlin]
locationAnimator.cameraPositionsFlow
  .onEach { cameraPosition -> }
  .launchIn(scope)
```

This provides data you can use to move your camera whenever a new camera position is read. 

h3(#location-animator-location-updates-animate). Providing location updates to animate

To use the animator you need to provide it with some information:

```[kotlin]
locationAnimator.animateLocationUpdate(locationUpdate, expectedIntervalBetweenLocationUpdatesInMilliseconds)
```

- locationUpdate := The location update from the subscriber.
- expectedIntervalBetweenLocationUpdatesInMilliseconds := Obtained from subscriber API, expected time within which the publisher is expected to send a location update.

h2(#see-also). See also

* "Overview":/asset-tracking
* "Using the example apps":/asset-tracking/example-apps
* "Asset Tracking Android training workshop project":https://github.com/ably/asset-tracking-android-training
* "Ably Asset Tracking Android SDK Reference - generated from source code":https://sdk.ably.com/builds/ably/ably-asset-tracking-android/main/dokka/index.html
* "Ably Asset Tracking Swift SDK Reference - generated from source code":https://sdk.ably.com/builds/ably/ably-asset-tracking-swift/main/jazzy/