blang[jsall].
  @AuthOptions@ is a plain Javascript object and is used when making "authentication":/realtime/authentication requests. If passed in, an @authOptions@ object will be used instead of (as opposed to supplementing or being merged with) the default values given when the library was instanced. The following attributes are supported:

blang[ruby].
  @AuthOptions@ is a Hash object and is used when making "authentication":/realtime/authentication requests. These options will supplement or override the corresponding options given when the library was instanced. The following key symbol values can be added to the Hash:

blang[python].
  @AuthOptions@ is a Dict and is used when making "authentication":/realtime/authentication requests. These options will supplement or override the corresponding options given when the library was instanced. The following key symbol values can be added to the Dict:

blang[php].
  @AuthOptions@ is an Associative Array and is used when making "authentication":/realtime/authentication requests. These options will supplement or override the corresponding options given when the library was instanced. The following named keys and values can be added to the Associative Array:

blang[java,swift,objc,go].
  <span lang="swift,objc">@ART@</span>@AuthOptions@ is used when making "authentication":/realtime/authentication requests. These options will supplement or override the corresponding options given when the library was instanced.

h4.
  default: Properties
  java:    Members
  ruby:    Attributes
  Python:  Attributes

<%= partial partial_version('shared/_token_auth_methods') %>

- <span lang="default">key</span><span lang="csharp,go">Key</span><span lang="ruby">:key</span><span lang="python">key</span> := Optionally the "API key":https://support.ably.io/solution/articles/3000030054-what-is-an-app-api-key to use can be specified as a full key string; if not, the API key passed into "@ClientOptions@":#client-options when instancing the Realtime or REST library is used<br>__Type: @String@__

- <span lang="default">queryTime</span><span lang="csharp,go">QueryTime</span><span lang="ruby">:query_time</span><span lang="python">query_time</span> := _false_ If true, the library will query the Ably servers for the current time when "issuing TokenRequests":/rest/authentication#token-authentication instead of relying on a locally-available time of day. Knowing the time accurately is needed to create valid signed Ably "TokenRequests":/rest/authentication#token-authentication, so this option is useful for library instances on auth servers where for some reason the server clock cannot be kept synchronized through normal means, such as an "NTP daemon":https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ntpd . The server is queried for the current time once per client library instance (which stores the offset from the local clock), so if using this option you should avoid instancing a new version of the library for each request.<br>__Type: @Boolean@__

- <span lang="default">token</span><span lang="csharp,go">Token</span><span lang="ruby">:token</span> := An authenticated token. This can either be a "@TokenDetails@":/realtime/types#token-details object, a "@TokenRequest@":/realtime/types#token-request object, or token string (obtained from the <span lang="default">@token@</span><span lang="csharp,go">@Token@</span> property of a "@TokenDetails@":/realtime/types#token-details component of an Ably TokenRequest response, or a "JSON Web Token":https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7519 satisfying "the Ably requirements for JWTs":https://www.ably.io/documentation/core-features/authentication#ably-jwt). This option is mostly useful for testing: since tokens are short-lived, in production you almost always want to use an authentication method that allows the client library to renew the token automatically when the previous one expires, such as <span lang="default">@authUrl@</span><span lang="csharp,go">AuthUrl</span><span lang="ruby">:auth_url</span><span lang="python">auth_url</span> or <span lang="default">authCallback</span><span lang="csharp,go">AuthCallback</span><span lang="python">auth_callback</span><span lang="ruby">:auth_callback</span>. Read more about "Token authentication":/core-features/authentication#token-authentication<br>__Type: @String@, @TokenDetails@ or @TokenRequest@__
