<div lang="java,android,swift,objc">
A @PushChannel@ is a property of a "@RealtimeChannel@":/realtime/channels#properties or "@RestChannel@":/rest/channels#properties. It provides "push devices":/general/push#platform-support the ability to subscribe and unsubscribe to push notifications on channels.

h4.
  Methods

h6(#subscribe-device).
  default: subscribeDevice

bq(definition).
  default: subscribeDevice()

Subscribe your device to the channel's push notifications.

h6(#subscribe-client).
  default: subscribeClient

bq(definition).
  default: subscribeClient()

"Subscribe all devices associated with your device's clientId":/general/push/activate-subscribe#subscribing-client-id to the channel's push notifications.

h6(#unsubscribe-device).
  default: unsubscribeDevice

bq(definition).
  default: unsubscribeDevice()

Unsubscribe your device from the channel's push notifications.

h6(#unsubscribe-client).
  default: unsubscribeClient

bq(definition).
  default: unsubscribeClient()

"Unsubscribe all devices associated with your device's clientId":/general/push/activate-subscribe#subscribing-client-id from the channel's push notifications.

h6(#list-subscriptions).
  default: listSubscriptions

bq(definition).
  java,android: "PaginatedResult":#paginated-result<"PushChannelSubscription":#push-channel-subscription> listSubscriptions(String deviceId, String clientId, String deviceClientId, String channel)
  objc,swift: listSubscriptions(deviceId: String?, clientId: String?, deviceClientId: String?, channel: String?, callback: ("ARTPaginatedResult":#paginated-result<"PushChannelSubscription":#push-channel-subscription>?, ARTErrorInfo?) -> Void)

"Unsubscribe all devices associated with your device's clientId":/general/push/activate-subscribe#subscribing-client-id from the channel's push notifications.

h4. Parameters

- <div lang="default">deviceId</div> := a deviceId to filter by<br>__Type: @String@__

- <div lang="default">clientId</div> := a clientId to filter by<br>__Type: @String@__

- <div lang="default">deviceClientId</div> := a client ID associated with a device to filter by<br>__Type: @String@__

- <div lang="swift,objc">callback</div> := called with a "ARTPaginatedResult":#paginated-result<"PushChannelSubscription":/general/push/admin#push-channel-subscription> object or an error

blang[objc,swift].
  h4. Callback result

  On success, @resultPage@ contains a "@PaginatedResult@":#paginated-result encapsulating an array of "PushChannelSubscription":/general/push/admin#push-channel-subscription objects corresponding to the current page of results. "@PaginatedResult@":#paginated-result supports pagination using "@next()@":#paginated-result and "@first()@":#paginated-result methods.

  On failure to retrieve message history, @err@ contains an "@ErrorInfo@":#error-info object with the failure reason.

blang[java,android].
  h4. Returns

  On success, the returned "@PaginatedResult@":#paginated-result encapsulates an array of "PushChannelSubscription":#push-channel-subscription objects corresponding to the current page of results. "@PaginatedResult@":#paginated-result supports pagination using "@next@":#paginated-result and "@first@":#paginated-result methods.

  Failure to retrieve the message history will raise an "@AblyException@":/realtime/types/#ably-exception
</div>
