blang[jsall].
  @TokenParams@ is a plain Javascript object and is used in the parameters of "token authentication":/realtime/authentication requests, corresponding to the desired attributes of the "Ably Token":/core-features/authentication#ably-tokens. The following attributes can be defined on the object:

blang[ruby].
  @TokenParams@ is a Hash object and is used in the parameters of "token authentication":/realtime/authentication requests, corresponding to the desired attributes of the "Ably Token":/core-features/authentication#ably-tokens. The following key symbol values can be added to the Hash:

blang[python].
  @TokenParams@ is a Dict and is used in the parameters of "token authentication":/realtime/authentication requests, corresponding to the desired attributes of the "Ably Token":/core-features/authentication#ably-tokens. The following keys-value pairs can be added to the Dict:

blang[php].
  @TokenParams@ is an Associative Array and is used in the parameters of "token authentication":/realtime/authentication requests, corresponding to the desired attributes of the "Ably Token":/core-features/authentication#ably-tokens. The following named keys and values can be added to the Associative Array:

blang[java,csharp].
  @TokenParams@ is used in the parameters of "token authentication":/realtime/authentication requests, corresponding to the desired attributes of the "Ably Token":/core-features/authentication#ably-tokens.

blang[objc,swift].
  @ARTTokenParams@ is used in the parameters of "token authentication":/realtime/authentication requests, corresponding to the desired attributes of the "Ably Token":/core-features/authentication#ably-tokens.

h4.
  default: Properties
  java:    Members
  ruby:    Attributes
  python:  Attributes

- <span lang="default">capability</span><span lang="csharp,go">Capability</span><span lang="ruby">:capability</span> := JSON stringified capability of the "Ably Token":/core-features/authentication#ably-tokens. If the "Ably Token":/core-features/authentication#ably-tokens request is successful, the capability of the returned "Ably Token":/core-features/authentication#ably-tokens will be the intersection of this capability with the capability of the issuing key. "Find our more about how to use capabilities to manage access privileges for clients":/core-features/authentication#capabilities-explained. __Type: <span lang="default">@String@</span><span lang="csharp">@Capability@</span>__

- <span lang="default">clientId</span><span lang="csharp,go">ClientId</span><span lang="python">client_id</span><span lang="ruby">:client_id</span> := A client ID, used for identifying this client when publishing messages or for presence purposes. The <span lang="default">@clientId@</span><span lang="ruby,python">@client_id@</span><span lang="csharp,go">@ClientId@</span> can be any non-empty string. This option is primarily intended to be used in situations where the library is instanced with a key; note that a <span lang="default">@clientId@</span><span lang="ruby,python">@client_id@</span><span lang="csharp,go">@ClientId@</span> may also be implicit in a token used to instance the library; an error will be raised if a <span lang="default">@clientId@</span><span lang="ruby,python">@client_id@</span><span lang="csharp,go">@ClientId@</span> specified here conflicts with the <span lang="default">@clientId@</span><span lang="ruby,python">@client_id@</span><span lang="csharp,go">@ClientId@</span> implicit in the token. "Find out more about client identities":/how-ably-works#client-identity<br>__Type: @String@__

- <span lang="default">nonce</span><span lang="csharp,go">Nonce</span><span lang="ruby">:nonce</span> := An optional opaque nonce string of at least 16 characters to ensure uniqueness of this request. Any subsequent request using the same nonce will be rejected.<br>__Type: @String@__

- <span lang="default">timestamp</span><span lang="csharp,go">Timestamp</span><span lang="ruby">:timestamp</span> := <span lang="default">The timestamp (in milliseconds since the epoch)</span><span lang="ruby,objc,swift,csharp">The timestamp</span> of this request. @timestamp@, in conjunction with the @nonce@, is used to prevent requests for "Ably Token":/core-features/authentication#ably-tokens from being replayed.<br>__Type: <span lang="default">@Integer@</span><span lang="java">@Long Integer@</span><span lang="ruby">@Time@</span><span lang="objc,swift">@NSDate@</span><span lang="csharp">@DateTimeOffset@</span>__

- <span lang="default">ttl</span><span lang="csharp,go">Ttl</span><span lang="ruby">:ttl</span> := _1 hour_ Requested time to live for the "Ably Token":/core-features/authentication#ably-tokens being created <span lang="default">in milliseconds</span><span lang="ruby">in seconds</span><span lang="objc,swift">as a @NSTimeInterval@</span><span lang="csharp,go">as a @TimeSpan@. When omitted, the Ably REST API default of 60 minutes is applied by Ably<br>__Type: <span lang="default">@Integer@ (milliseconds)</span><span lang="ruby">@Integer@ (seconds)</span><span lang="objc,swift">@NSTimeInterval@</span><span lang="java">@Long Integer@</span><span lang="csharp">@TimeSpan@</span>__
