---
title: Statistics
meta_description: "Client Library SDK REST API Reference Statistics documentation."
meta_keywords: "Ably, Ably REST, API Reference, REST SDK, REST interface, REST API, Statistics"
section: api
index: 100
languages:
  - javascript
  - nodejs
  - php
  - python
  - ruby
  - java
  - swift
  - objc
  - csharp
  - go
jump_to:
  API reference:
    - stats#stats
  Types:
    - Related Types#related-types
redirect_from:
  - /api/versions/v1.1/rest-sdk/statistics
  - /api/versions/v1.0/rest-sdk/statistics
  - /api/versions/v0.8/rest-sdk/statistics
---

blang[javascript,nodejs].

  <aside data-type='note'>
  <p>This API reference is for version 1.2 of the JavaScript SDK. Version 2.0 references are "available in TypeDoc.":https://ably.com/docs/sdk/js/v2.0/</p>
  </aside>

h6(#stats).
  default: stats
  csharp,go: Stats

bq(definition).
  jsall:      stats(Object options, callback("ErrorInfo":/api/rest-sdk/types#error-info err, "PaginatedResult":/api/rest-sdk/types#paginated-result<"Stats":/api/rest-sdk/types#stats> results))
  ruby:       "PaginatedResult":/api/rest-sdk/types#paginated-result<"Stats":/api/rest-sdk/types#stats> stats(Hash options)
  python:     "PaginatedResult":/api/rest-sdk/types#paginated-result<"Stats":/api/rest-sdk/types#stats> stats(kwargs_options)
  php:        "PaginatedResult":/api/rest-sdk/types#paginated-result<"Stats":/api/rest-sdk/types#stats> stats(Array options)
  java:       "PaginatedResult":/api/rest-sdk/types#paginated-result<"Stats":/api/rest-sdk/types#stats-type> stats("Param":#param[] options)
  csharp:     Task<"PaginatedResult":/api/rest-sdk/types#paginated-result<"Stats":/api/rest-sdk/types#stats-type>> StatsAsync(@StatsRequestParams@ query)
  swift,objc: stats(query: ARTStatsQuery?, callback: ("ARTPaginatedResult":#/realtime/types#paginated-result<"ARTStats":/api/realtime-sdk/types#stats>?, ARTErrorInfo?) -> Void) throws
  go:         (c <notextile>*</notextile>RestClient) Stats(params <notextile>*</notextile>PaginateParams) (<notextile>*</notextile>PaginatedResult, error)

This call queries the "Ably REST @/stats@ API endpoint":/api/rest-api#stats-type and retrieves your application's usage statistics. A "PaginatedResult":/api/rest-sdk/types#paginated-result is returned, containing an array of "Stats":/api/rest-sdk/types#stats-type for the first page of results. "PaginatedResult":/api/rest-sdk/types#paginated-result objects are iterable providing a means to page through historical statistics. "See an example set of raw stats returned via the REST API":/metadata-stats/stats#metrics.

<%= partial partial_version('rest/_stats') %>

h2(#related-types). Related types

h3(#stats-type).
  default: Stats object
  objc,swift: ARTStats
  java:    io.ably.lib.types.Stats
  ruby:    Ably::Models::Stats
  php:     Ably\Models\Stats
  csharp:  IO.Ably.Stats

<%= partial partial_version('types/_stats') %>

h3(#stats-request-params).
  csharp: IO.Ably.StatsRequestParams

blang[csharp].
  <%= partial partial_version('types/_stats_request_params'), indent: 2, skip_first_indent: true %>

h3(#stats-granularity).
  objc,swift: ARTStatsGranularity
  csharp:     IO.Ably.StatsGranularity

<%= partial partial_version('types/_stats_granularity') %>

h3(#param).
  java:    io.ably.lib.types.Param

blang[java].
  <%= partial partial_version('types/_param'), indent: 2, skip_first_indent: true %>
