---
title: Overview
meta_description: "Client presence is available for channels. Presence events occur when clients enter, leave, or change state on a channel and occupancy provides high level statistics."
---

Presence and occupancy are features that provide information about the clients and "connections":/connect attached to a channel. 

Occupancy returns high level metrics about the clients attached to a channel, such as the number of publishers and subscribers. Presence provides details about individual members that have joined a channel's presence set. Each member in the presence set can have data associated with them. Any change in the membership of the presence set, or the data of a member, will trigger a presence event on the channel.

h2(#presence-vs-occupancy). Occupancy vs. presence

Presence is used for following events created by individual clients whereas occupancy provides a wider update of attached clients, breaking them down into a number of different metrics.

Presence provides information about the activity of members entered into the presence set of a channel. Presence members announce their state to presence subscribers via presence events. For example, when entering the presence set, leaving the presence set, or updating their member data.

Occupancy provides metrics about the clients attached to a channel. This includes a count of the number of clients attached, the number of publishers and subscribers, the number of presence members, and the number of presence publishers and subscribers.

Whether to use presence, occupancy, or both will depend on your use case. For example, in a smaller chat channel it might be beneficial to have enter and leave messages whenever a user joins or leaves. However, in a channel with 1000s of users that level of detail could become overwhelming and would impact an "account's message limit":/account/LINK-ME more. In those situations using occupancy to just show the number of active users might make more sense. 

Some other examples applications include:

* A game app using presence for users entering and leaving and occupancy for the population of servers in a server list
* A presenter in a video conferencing only seeing the total number of viewers with occupancy, whereas administrators might want to see each user event with presence