---
title: Encryption
meta_description: "Client Library SDK REST API Reference Crypto documentation."
meta_keywords: "Ably, Ably REST, API Reference, REST SDK, REST interface, REST API, Encryption, Crypto"
section: api
index: 90
languages:
  - javascript
  - nodejs
  - php
  - python
  - ruby
  - java
  - swift
  - objc
  - csharp
jump_to:
  API Reference:
    - getDefaultParams#get-default-params
    - generateRandomKey#generate-random-key
  Related types:
    - Channel Options
    - CipherParams#cipher-params
---

inline-toc.
  Methods:
    - getDefaultParams#get-default-params
    - generateRandomKey#generate-random-key
  Related types:
    - Channel Options
    - CipherParams#cipher-params

The <span lang="default">@Ably.Rest.Crypto@</span><span lang="ruby">@Ably::Util::Crypto@</span><span lang="php">@Ably\Utils\Crypto@</span><span lang="python">@ably.util.crypto@</span><span lang="java">@io.ably.lib.util.crypto@</span><span lang="swift,objc">@ARTCrypto@</span><span lang="csharp"> @IO.Ably.Encryption.Crypto@</span> object exposes the following public methods:

h2(#methods). Methods

h6(#get-default-params).
  default:  getDefaultParams
  ruby:     get_default_params
  python:   get_default_params
  csharp:   GetDefaultParams

bq(definition).
  jsall:   "CipherParams":#cipher-params Crypto.getDefaultParams(Object params)
  ruby:    "CipherParams":#cipher-params Crypto.get_default_params(Hash params)
  python:  "CipherParams":#cipher-params Crypto.get_default_params(Dict params)
  php:     "CipherParams":#cipher-params Crypto.getDefaultParam(Array params)
  java:    "CipherParams":#cipher-params Crypto.getDefaultParams(Param[] params)
  csharp:  "CipherParams":#cipher-params GetDefaultParams(byte[] key = null, byte[] iv = null, CipherMode? mode = null)
  swift,objc: getDefaultParams(values: [NSObject : AnyObject]) -> "ARTCipherParams":#cipher-params

<span lang="default">This call obtains a "@CipherParams@":#cipher-params object using the values passed in (which must be a subset of @CipherParams@ fields that at a minimum includes a @key@), filling in any unspecified fields with default values, and checks that the result is a valid and self-consistent.</span><span lang="csharp">This call takes a key, an initialization vector (iv) and a Cipher mode. There is also on override which accepts the @key@ and @iv@ as base64 encoded strings. It will validate the passed values and generate @CipherParams@</span>

You will rarely need to call this yourself, since the client library will handle it for you if you specify @cipher@ params when initializing a channel (as in the example "at the top":/rest/encryption#getting-started)<span lang="jsall"> or when setting channel options with @channel#setOptions@</span>.

h4. Parameters

- <span lang="default">params</span><span lang="csharp">arguments</span> := The cipher <span lang="default">params</span><span lang="csharp">arguments</span> that you want to specify. It must at a minimum include a @key@, which should be either a binary (<span lang="java,csharp">@byte[]@</span><span lang="javascript">@ArrayBuffer@ or @WordArray@</span><span lang="nodejs">@Buffer@</span><span lang="ruby">byte array</span><span lang="objc,swift">@NSData@</span>) or a base64-encoded <span lang="objc">@NS@</span>@String@.

h4. Returns

On success, the method returns a complete "@CipherParams@":#cipher-params object. Failure will raise an <span lang="php,ruby,java,python">"@AblyException@":/rest/types/#ably-exception </span><span lang="default">exception</span>.

h4. Example

```[jsall]
  var cipherParams = Ably.Rest.Crypto.getDefaultParams({key: <key>});
  var channelOpts = { cipher: cipherParams };
  var channel = rest.channels.get('{{RANDOM_CHANNEL_NAME}}', channelOpts);
```

```[ruby]
  cipher_params = Ably::Util::Crypto.get_default_params({key: <key>})
  channel_opts = { cipher: cipher_params }
  channel = rest.channels.get('{{RANDOM_CHANNEL_NAME}}', channel_opts)
```

```[python]
  cipher_params = ably.util.crypto.get_default_params({'key': <key>})
  channel = rest.channels.get('{{RANDOM_CHANNEL_NAME}}', cipher=cipher_params)
```

```[php]
  $cipherParams = Ably\Utils\Crypto->getDefaultParams(array('key' => <key>));
  $channelOpts = array('cipher' => $cipherParams);
  $channel = $rest->channels->get('{{RANDOM_CHANNEL_NAME}}', $channelOpts);
```

```[java]
  CipherParams params = Crypto.getDefaultParams(new Param[]{ new Param("key", <key>) });
  ChannelOptions options = new ChannelOptions();
  options.encrypted = true;
  options.cipherParams = params;
  Channel channel = rest.channels.get("{{RANDOM_CHANNEL_NAME}}", options);
```

```[csharp]
  CipherParams cipherParams = Crypto.GetDefaultParams(<key>);
  var channel = rest.Channels.Get("{{RANDOM_CHANNEL_NAME}}", new ChannelOptions(cipherParams));
```

```[objc]
ARTCipherParams *params = [ARTCrypto getDefaultParams:@{@"key": <key>}];
ARTChannelOptions *options = [[ARTChannelOptions alloc] initWithCipher:params];
ARTRealtimeChannel *channel = [rest.channels get:@"{{RANDOM_CHANNEL_NAME}}" options:options];
```

```[swift]
let params = ARTCrypto.getDefaultParams(["key": <key>])
let options = ARTChannelOptions(cipher: params)
let channel = rest.channels.get("{{RANDOM_CHANNEL_NAME}}", options: options)
```

h6(#generate-random-key).
  default:  generateRandomKey
  ruby:     generate_random_key
  python:   generate_random_key
  csharp:   GenerateRandomKey

bq(definition).
  default: Crypto.generateRandomKey(Int keyLength?, callback("ErrorInfo":/rest/types#error-info err, @Buffer@ key))
  ruby:    byte array Crypto.generate_random_key(Int key_length?)
  python:  byte array Crypto.generate_random_key(Int key_length?)
  php:     string Crypto.generateRandomKey(Int keyLength?)
  java:    @byte[]@ Crypto.generateRandomKey(Int keyLength?)
  csharp:  byte[] GenerateRandomKey(int? keyLength = null, CipherMode? mode = null)
  objc,swift: generateRandomKey(length?: UInt) -> NSData

This call obtains a randomly-generated binary key of the specified key length<span lang="csharp"> and optional CipherMode</span>.

h4. Parameters

- <span lang="default">keyLength</span><span lang="ruby,python">key_length</span> := Optional @Int@ with the length of key to generate. For AES, this should be either 128 or 256. If unspecified, defaults to <span language="default">256</span><span language="java">128</span>.

- <div lang="csharp">mode</div> := Optional AES @CipherMode@ which is used when the key is generated
- <div lang="jsall">callback</div> := is a function of the form @function(err, key)@ which is called upon completion

blang[jsall].
  h4. Callback result

  On successfully generating a key, the callback is called with that key as a <span lang=javascript>@WordArray@</span><span lang=nodejs>@Buffer@</span>, and @err@ is @null@. On failure to create a key, @err@ contains an "@ErrorInfo@":#error-info object describing the failure reason.

blang[java,ruby,objc,swift,php,python,csharp].
  h4. Returns

  On success, the method returns the generated key as a <span lang="java">@byte[]@ array</span><span lang="python">@bytes@</span><span lang="ruby">byte array</span><span lang="php">binary string</span><span lang="objc,swift">@NSData@</span>. Failure will raise an "@AblyException@":/rest/types/#ably-exception .

h4. Example

```[jsall]
  Ably.Rest.Crypto.generateRandomKey(256, function(err, key) {
    if(err) {
      console.log("Key generation failed: " + err.toString());
    } else {
      var channel = rest.channels.get('{{RANDOM_CHANNEL_NAME}}', {cipher: {key: key}});
    }
  });
```

```[ruby]
  key = Ably::Util::Crypto.generate_random_key(256)
  channel = rest.channels.get('{{RANDOM_CHANNEL_NAME}}', { cipher: {key: key}})
```

```[python]
  cipher_params = ably.util.crypto.generate_random_key(256)
  channel = rest.channels.get('{{RANDOM_CHANNEL_NAME}}', cipher={'key': key})
```

```[php]
  $key = Ably\Utils\Crypto->generateRandomKey(256);
  $channel = $rest->channels->get('{{RANDOM_CHANNEL_NAME}}', array('cipher' => array('key' => $key)));
```

```[java]
  byte[] key = Crypto.generateRandomKey(256);
  ChannelOptions options = ChannelOptions.withCipher(key);
  Channel channel = rest.channels.get("{{RANDOM_CHANNEL_NAME}}", options);
```

```[csharp]
  byte[] key = Crypto.GenerateRandomKey(256);
  ChannelOptions options = new ChannelOptions(key);
  var channel = rest.Channels.Get("{{RANDOM_CHANNEL_NAME}}", options);
```

```[objc]
  NSData *key = [ARTCrypto generateRandomKey:256];
  ARTChannelOptions *options = [[ARTChannelOptions alloc] initWithCipherKey:key];
  ARTRealtimeChannel *channel = [rest.channels get:@"{{RANDOM_CHANNEL_NAME}}" options:options];
```

```[swift]
let key = ARTCrypto.generateRandomKey(256)
let options = ARTChannelOptions(cipherWithKey: key)
let channel = rest.channels.get("{{RANDOM_CHANNEL_NAME}}", options: options)
```

h2(#related-types). Related types

h3(#channel-options).
  default:     ChannelOptions Object
  objc,swift:  ARTChannelOptions
  ruby:        ChannelOptions Hash
  python:      ChannelOptions Dict
  php:         ChannelOptions Array
  csharp:      IO.Ably.ChannelOptions
  java:        io.ably.lib.types.ChannelOptions

<%= partial partial_version('types/_channel_options') %>

h3(#cipher-params).
  default:    CipherParams
  objc,swift: ARTCipherParams
  ruby:       CipherParams Hash
  python:     CipherParams Dict
  php:        CipherParams Array
  csharp:     IO.Ably.CipherParams
  java:       io.ably.lib.util.Crypto.CipherParams

<%= partial partial_version('types/_cipher_params') %>
