---
title: Presence
meta_description: "Presence events provide clients with information about the status of other clients 'present' on a channel"
meta_keywords: "Ably, presence, presence events, channel members, presence history."
section: api
index: 50
languages:
  - javascript
  - nodejs
  - php
  - python
  - ruby
  - java
  - swift
  - objc
  - csharp
jump_to:
  Presence API reference:
    - get
    - history
---

inline-toc.
  Methods:
    - get()#get
    - history()#history
  Related types:
    - PresenceMessage#presence-message
    - Presence action
    - PaginatedResult#paginated-result
    - Param

h2. Methods

h6(#get).
  default: get
  csharp: Get

Get the current presence member set for this channel.  In the REST client library this method directly queries "Ably's REST presence API":/api/rest-api#presence

bq(definition).
  default: get(Object options, callback("ErrorInfo":/api/realtime-sdk/types#error-info err, "PaginatedResult":#paginated-result<"PresenceMessage":#presence-message> resultPage))
  ruby:    "PaginatedResult":#paginated-result<"PresenceMessage":#presence-message> get(Hash options)
  python:  "PaginatedResult":#paginated-result<"PresenceMessage":#presence-message> get(kwargs_options)
  php:     "PaginatedResult":#paginated-result<"PresenceMessage":#presence-message> get(Array options)
  java:    "PaginatedResult":#paginated-result<"PresenceMessage":#presence-message> get("Param":#param[] options)
  csharp:  Task<"PaginatedResult":#paginated-result<"PresenceMessage":#presence-message>> GetAsync(int? limit = null, string clientId = null, string connectionId = null);
  swift,objc: get(query: ARTPresenceQuery, callback: (["ARTPresenceMessage":#presence-message], ARTErrorInfo?) -> Void)

Gets an array of members present on the channel as "PresenceMessage":#presence-message objects.

blang[jsall,ruby,python,php,java,swift,objc].
  h4. Parameters

  - <span lang="default">options</span><span lang="objc,swift,csharp">query</span><span lang="java">"Param":#param[] options</span> := <span lang="default">an optional object containing query parameters</span><span lang="python">optional keyword arguments containing the query parameters</span><span lang="ruby">an optional set of symbol key and value pairs containing the query parameters</span><span lang="php">an optional Associate Array containing the query parameters</span> as specified below.

  - <div lang="jsall">callback</div> := is a function of the form: @function(err, "PaginatedResult":#paginated-result<"PresenceMessage":#presence-message> resultPage)@
  - <div lang="objc,swift">callback</div> := called with a "@PaginatedResult@":#paginated-result@<@"@PresenceMessage@":#presence-message@>@, or with an error

h4. <span lang="default">@options@ parameters</span><span lang="objc,swift">@ARTPresenceQuery@ properties</span><span lang="csharp">Arguments</span>

- <span lang="default">clientId</span><span lang="python">client_id</span><span lang="ruby">:client_id</span> := when provided, will filter array of members returned that match the provided <span lang="default">"@clientId@":/api/rest-sdk#client-id</span><span lang="ruby,python">"@client_id@":/api/rest-sdk#client-id</span><span lang="csharp">"@ClientId@":/api/rest-sdk#client-id</span> string
- <span lang="default">connectionId</span><span lang="python">connection_id</span><span lang="ruby">:connection_id</span> := when provided, will filter array of members returned that match the provided <span lang="default">@connectionId@</span><span lang="csharp">@ConnectionId@</span><span lang="ruby">@connection_id@</span>":/api/realtime-sdk/connection#id string

blang[jsall].
  h4. Callback result

  On success, @resultPage@ contains a "@PaginatedResult@":#paginated-result encapsulating an array of "@PresenceMessage@":#presence-message objects corresponding to the current page of members currently present on the channel. "@PaginatedResult@":#paginated-result supports pagination using "@next()@":#paginated-result and "@first()@":#paginated-result methods.

  On failure to retrieve the current presence member set, @err@ contains an "@ErrorInfo@":#error-info object with the failure reason.

blang[java,ruby,php,python,csharp].
  h4. Returns

  <span lang="csharp">This method is asynchronous and needs to be awaited.</span>

  On success, the returned "@PaginatedResult@":#paginated-result encapsulates an array of "@PresenceMessage@":#presence-message objects corresponding to the current page of members currently present on the channel. "@PaginatedResult@":#paginated-result supports pagination using "<span lang="default">@next@</span><span lang="csharp">@NextAsync@</span>":#paginated-result and "<span lang="default">@first@</span><span lang="csharp">@FirstAsync@</span>":#paginated-result methods.

  Failure to retrieve the current presence member set will raise an "@AblyException@":/api/realtime-sdk/types#ably-exception

h6(#history). History

bq(definition).
  default: history(Object options, callback("ErrorInfo":/api/rest-sdk/types#error-info err, "PaginatedResult":#paginated-result<"PresenceMessage":#presence-message> resultPage))
  ruby:    "PaginatedResult":#paginated-result<"PresenceMessage":#presence-message> history(Hash options)
  python:  "PaginatedResult":#paginated-result<"PresenceMessage":#presence-message> history(kwargs_options)
  php:     "PaginatedResult":#paginated-result<"PresenceMessage":#presence-message> history(Array options)
  java:    "PaginatedResult":#paginated-result<"PresenceMessage":#presence-message> history("Param":#param[] options)
  csharp:  Task<"PaginatedResult":#paginated-result<"PresenceMessage":#presence-message>> HistoryAsync("HistoryRequestParams":#history-request-params query);
  objc,swift: history(query: ARTDataQuery?, callback: ("ARTPaginatedResult":#paginated-result<"ARTPresenceMessage":#presence-message>?, ARTErrorInfo?) -> Void) throws

Gets a "paginated":#paginated-result set of historical presence message events for this channel. If the "channel is configured to persist messages to disk":https://faqs.ably.com/how-long-are-messages-stored-for, then the presence message event history will "typically be available for 24 - 72 hours":https://faqs.ably.com/how-long-are-messages-stored-for. If not, presence message events are only retained in memory by the Ably service for two minutes.

h4. Parameters

- <span lang="default">options</span><span lang="java">"Param":#param[] options</span><span lang="objc,swift">query</span><span lang="csharp">"HistoryRequestParams":#history-request-params query</span> := <span lang="default">an optional object containing query parameters</span><span lang="python">optional keyword arguments containing the query parameters</span><span lang="ruby">an optional set of key value pairs containing query parameters</span><span lang="php">an optional Associate Array containing the query parameters</span>, as specified in the "presence history API documentation":/storage-history/history#presence-history.

- <div lang="jsall">callback</div> := is a function of the form: @function(err, resultPage)@
- <div lang="swift,objc">callback</div> := called with a "ARTPaginatedResult":#paginated-result<"ARTPresenceMessage":#presence-message> object or an error

blang[jsall,swift,objc].
  h4. Callback result

  On success, @resultPage@ contains a "@PaginatedResult@":#paginated-result encapsulating an array of "@PresenceMessage@":#presence-message objects corresponding to the current page of results. "@PaginatedResult@":#paginated-result supports pagination using "@next()@":#paginated-result and "@first()@":#paginated-result methods.

  On failure to retrieve message history, @err@ contains an "@ErrorInfo@":#error-info object with the failure reason.

blang[java,ruby,php,python,csharp].
  h4. Returns

  <span lang="csharp">This method is asynchronous and needs to be awaited.</span>

  On success, the returned "@PaginatedResult@":#paginated-result encapsulates an array of "@PresenceMessage@":#presence-message objects corresponding to the current page of results. "@PaginatedResult@":#paginated-result supports pagination using "<span lang="default">@next@</span><span lang="csharp">@NextAsync@</span>":#paginated-result and "<span lang="default">@first@</span><span lang="csharp">@FirstAsync@</span>":#paginated-result methods.

  Failure to retrieve the message history will raise an "@AblyException@":/api/realtime-sdk/types#ably-exception

h2(#related-types). Related types

h3(#presence-message).
  default: PresenceMessage
  swift,objc: ARTPresenceMessage
  ruby:    Ably::Models::PresenceMessage
  java:    io.ably.lib.types.PresenceMessage
  csharp:  IO.Ably.PresenceMessage

<%= partial partial_version('types/_presence_message') %>

h3(#presence-action).
  default: Presence action
  python:  PresenceAction
  swift,objc: ARTPresenceAction
  java:    io.ably.lib.types.PresenceMessage.Action
  ruby:    Ably::Models::PresenceMessage::ACTION
  csharp:  IO.Ably.PresenceAction

<%= partial partial_version('types/_presence_action') %>

h3(#history-request-params).
  csharp: HistoryRequestParams

blang[csharp].
  <%= partial partial_version('types/_history_request_params'), indent: 2, skip_first_indent: true %>

h3(#paginated-result).
  default: PaginatedResult
  swift,objc: ARTPaginatedResult
  ruby:    Ably::Models::PaginatedResult
  java:    io.ably.lib.types.PaginatedResult
  csharp:  IO.Ably.PaginatedResult

<%= partial partial_version('types/_paginated_result') %>

h3(#param).
  java:    io.ably.lib.types.Param

blang[java].
  <%= partial partial_version('types/_param'), indent: 2, skip_first_indent: true %>
