One or more channel rules may be configured for an app in your "dashboard":https://ably.com/dashboard. These are rules which apply to a channel based on its 'namespace'. The namespace is the first colon-delimited segment of its name (from the start, up to and including, the last character before the @:@). If the channel name contains no colon, the namespace is the entire channel name.

For example, the following channels are all part of the "public" namespace:

* @public@
* @public:events@
* @public:news:americas@

*Note* that wildcards are not supported in channel namespaces.

The namespace attributes that can be configured are:

- Persist last message := if enabled, the very last message published on a channel will be stored for an entire year, retrievable using the "channel rewind mechanism":/channels/options/rewind by attaching to the channel with @rewind=1@. If you send multiple messages atomically in a single protocol message, for example with @publish([{...}, {...}, {...}])@, you would receive all of them as one message. Only messages are stored, not presence messages. This last message storage is not accessible using the normal history API, only through rewind. **Please note that for the message stored, an additional message is deducted from your monthly allocation.**
- Persist all messages := if enabled, all messages within this namespace will be stored according to the storage rules for your account (24 hours for free accounts). You can access stored messages via the "history API":/storage-history/history. **Please note that for each message stored, an additional message is deducted from your monthly allocation.**
- Identified := if enabled, clients will not be permitted to use (including to attach, publish, or subscribe) matching channels unless they are "identified":/auth/identified-clients (they have an assigned client ID). Anonymous clients are not permitted to join these channels. Find out more about "authenticated and identified clients":/auth/identified-clients.
- TLS only := if enabled, only clients who have connected to Ably over TLS will be allowed to use matching channels. By default all of Ably's client libraries use TLS when communicating with Ably over REST or when using our Realtime transports such as Websockets.
- Push notifications enabled := If checked, publishing messages with a push payload in the extras field is permitted and can trigger the delivery of a push notification to registered devices for the channel. Find out more about "push notifications":/general/push.
- Message interactions enabled := If enabled, messages received on a channel will contain a unique @timeserial@ that can be referenced by later messages for use with message interactions. Find out more about "message interactions":/channels/messages#message-interactions.

Key or token capabilities can also specify access rights based on channel namespace. Find out more about "authentication":/auth.
