Currently the supported channel options are only used for "configuring encryption":/realtime/encryption.

blang[jsall].
  @ChannelOptions@, a plain Javascript object, may optionally be specified when instancing a "@Channel@":/realtime/channels, and this may be used to specify channel-specific options. The following attributes can be defined on the object:

blang[ruby].
  @ChannelOptions@, a Hash object, may optionally be specified when instancing a "@Channel@":/realtime/channels, and this may be used to specify channel-specific options. The following key symbol values can be added to the Hash:

blang[php].
  @ChannelOptions@, an Associative Array, may optionally be specified when instancing a "@Channel@":/realtime/channels, and this may be used to specify channel-specific options. The following named keys and values can be added to the Associated Array:

blang[java,swift,objc].
  <span lang="swift,objc">@ART@</span><span lang="java">@io.ably.lib.types.@</span>@ChannelOptions@ may optionally be specified when instancing a "@Channel@":/realtime/channels, and this may be used to specify channel-specific options.

blang[csharp].
  @IO.Ably.ChannelOptions@ may optionally be specified when instancing a "@Channel@":/realtime/channels, and this may be used to specify channel-specific options.

h4.
  default: Properties
  java:    Members
  ruby:    Attributes

- <span lang="default">cipher</span><span lang="ruby">:cipher</span><span lang="csharp">CipherParams</span> := Requests encryption for this channel when not null, and specifies encryption-related parameters (such as algorithm, chaining mode, key length and key). See "an example":/realtime/encryption#getting-started<br>__Type: "@CipherParams@":/realtime/encryption#cipher-params<span lang="jsall,java,ruby,php"> or <span lang="jsall">an options object</span><span lang="java">a @Param[]@ list</span><span lang="ruby">an options hash</span><span lang="php">an Associative Array</span> containing at a minimum a @key@</span>__

blang[java].
  h4. Static methods

  h6(#with-cipher-key). withCipherKey

  bq(definition). static ChannelOptions.withCipherKey(Byte[] or String key)

  A helper method to generate a @ChannelOptions@ for the simple case where you only specify a key.

  h4. Parameters

  - key := A binary @Byte[]@ array or a base64-encoded @String@.

  h4. Returns

  On success, the method returns a complete @ChannelOptions@ object. Failure will raise an "@AblyException@":/realtime/types/#ably-exception.
