A @LastConnectionDetails@ object provides details on the last connection in a browser environment persisted when the @window beforeunload@ fired. This object is provided to the callback specified in the @recover@ attribute of "@ClientOptions@":/realtime/types#client-options. The callback in turn instructs the client library whether the connection should be recovered or not. See "connection state recovery":/realtime/connection/#connection-state-recovery for more information.

Please note that as "@sessionStorage@":https://www.w3.org/TR/webstorage/ is used to persist the @LastConnectionDetails@ between page reloads, it is only available for pages in the same origin and top-level browsing context.

h4.
  default: Properties

- recoveryKey := An opaque string obtained from the "recoveryKey":/realtime/connection/#recovery-key attribute of the "Connection object":/realtime/connection before the page was unloaded. This property is used by the library to recover the connection<br>__Type: @String@__

- disconnectedAt := the time at which the previous library was abruptly disconnected before the page was unloaded. This is represented as milliseconds since epoch<br>__Type: @Integer@__

- location := a clone of "@location@":https://www.w3.org/TR/html5/browsers.html#the-location-interface object of the previous page's @document@ object before the page was unloaded. A common use case for this attribute is to ensure that the previous page URL is the same as the current URL before allowing the connection to be recovered. For example, you may want the connection to be recovered only for page reloads, but not when a user navigates to a different page<br>__Type: @String@__

- clientId := the "@clientId@":/realtime/authentication/#client-id of the "client's Auth object":/realtime/authentication before the page was unloaded. A common use case for this attribute is to ensure that the current logged in user's @clientId@ matches the previous connection's @clientId@ before allowing the connection to be recovered. Ably prohibits changing a @clientId@ for an existing connection, so any mismatch in @clientId@ during a recover will result in the connection moving to the failed state<br>__Type: @String@__
