h4. Parameters

- <span lang="default">options</span><span lang="objc,swift">query</span> := an optional <span lang="default">object</span><span lang="ruby">Hash</span><span lang="objc,swift">@ARTStatsQuery@</span><span lang="java">"@Param@":#param[] array</span> containing the query parameters

- <div lang="jsall">callback</div> := is a function of the form: @function(err, result)@
- <div lang="ruby">&block</div> := yields a @PaginatedResult<Stats>@ array
- <div lang="swift,objc">callback</div> := called with a "ARTPaginatedResult":#paginated-result<"ARTStats":/rest/types#stats> object or an error

h4. <span lang="default">@options@ parameters</span><span lang="objc,swift">@ARTStatsQuery@ properties</span>

The following options, as defined in the "REST @/stats@ API":/rest-api#stats endpoint, are permitted:

- <span lang="ruby">:</span>start := _beginning of time_ earliest <span lang="ruby">@Time@ or </span>time in milliseconds since the epoch for any stats retrieved<br>__Type: @Long@<span lang="ruby">, @Time@</span>__
- <span lang="ruby">:</span>end := _current time_ latest <span lang="ruby">@Time@ or </span>time in milliseconds since the epoch for any stats retrieved<br>__Type: @Long@<span lang="ruby">, @Time@</span>__
- <span lang="ruby">:</span>direction := _backwards_ <span lang="ruby">@:@</span>@forwards@ or <span lang="ruby">@:@</span>@backwards@<br>__Type: <span lang="default">@String@</span><span lang="ruby">@Symbol@</span>__
- <span lang="ruby">:</span>limit := _100_ maximum number of messages to retrieve up to 1,000<br>__Type: @Integer@__
- <span lang="ruby">:</span>unit := _minute_ <span lang="ruby">@:@</span>@minute@, <span lang="ruby">@:@</span>@hour@, <span lang="ruby">@:@</span>@day@ or <span lang="ruby">@:@</span>@month@. Based on the unit selected, the given start or end times are rounded down to the start of the relevant interval depending on the unit granularity of the query<br>__Type: <span lang="default">@String@</span><span lang="objc,swift">"@ARTStatsGranularity@":#stats-granularity</span><span lang="ruby">@Symbol@</span>__

blang[jsall,objc,swift].
  h4. Callback result

  On success, @result@ contains a "@PaginatedResult@":#paginated-result encapsulating an array of "@Stats@":/realtime/types#stats objects corresponding to the current page of results. "@PaginatedResult@":#paginated-result supports pagination using "@next@":#paginated-result and "@first@":#paginated-result methods.

  On failure to retrieve stats, @err@ contains an "@ErrorInfo@":#error-info object with an error response as defined in the "Ably REST API":/rest-api#common documentation.

blang[java].
  h4. Returns

  On success, the returned "@PaginatedResult@":#paginated-result encapsulates an array of "@Stats@":/realtime/types#stats objects corresponding to the current page of results. "@PaginatedResult@":#paginated-result supports pagination using "@next@":#paginated-result and "@first@":#paginated-result methods.

  Failure to retrieve the stats will raise an "@AblyException@":/realtime/types/#ably-exception

blang[ruby].
  h4. Returns

  A "@Deferrable@":/realtime/types#deferrable object is returned from the stats method.

  On success, the registered success callbacks for the "@Deferrable@":/realtime/types#deferrable and any block provided to the method yields a "PaginatedResult":#paginated-result that encapsulates an array of "@Stats@":/realtime/types#stats objects corresponding to the current page of results. "@PaginatedResult@":#paginated-result supports pagination using "@next@":#paginated-result and "@first@":#paginated-result methods.

  Failure to retrieve the stats will trigger the errback callbacks of the "@Deferrable@":/realtime/types#deferrable with an "@ErrorInfo@":#error-info object containing an error response as defined in the "Ably REST API":/rest-api#common documentation.
