---
title: Channel Metadata API
section: realtime
index: 31
jump_to:
  Help with:
    - Overview#overview
    - Metachannels#metachannels
    - Permissions#permissions
    - Subscribing to metadata events#subscribing-to-metadata-events
    - Use cases#use-cases
    - Tutorials#tutorials
  Channel API Types:
    - ChannelDetails#channel-details
    - ChannelStatus#channel-status
    - Occupancy#occupancy
---

h2(#overview). Overview

The @Channel Metadata API@ allows for information about channels, such as the current state changes of a channel, or the changes in its occupancy, to be accessed. This is enabled through three primary mechanisms:

* "Channel lifecycle events":#lifecycle-events are triggered when a channel changes its "lifecycle state":#lifecycle-events.
* "Channel Occupancy events":#occupancy are sent periodically whenever there is a change in the occupancy of a channel, indicating how many of each type of occupant i.e. publishers, subscribers, presence members or connections there are.
* The "Channel Status API":/rest/channel-status allows for users to query a one-off request with regards to status and occupancy data of channels using a REST query. In addition to that, it also allows you "enumerate":/rest/channel-status#enumeration-rest all the active channels in a particular app. The details of the Channel Status API are covered in out "REST library documentation":/rest/channel-status.

In addition, note that since the metadata of various channels is prone to change very frequently, unless you have a special use case within your app, we recommend you to subscribe to the realtime events via the "Channel Metadata API":/realtime/channel-metadata rather than poll for updates via REST, as this is inefficient and data is still likely to become stale as soon as you have received it.

h2(#metachannels). Metachannels

Metachannels are a namespace of channels which all start with the @[meta]@ qualifier, uniquely identifying them from regular channels. An example of a metachannel would be @[meta]channel.lifecycle@.

There are a number of metachannels available, which are:

- [meta]log := This metachannel is used to broadcast log messages (usually error messages) for events that occur within the application's context
- [meta]channel.lifecycle := This metachannel carries messages about channel lifecycle and metadata
- [meta]connection.lifecycle := This metachannel carries messages about the lifecycle of realtime connections

All of the metadata associated with an app or a channel is available on one of these metachannels only.

h2(#permissions). Permissions

A regular Ably key has a "capability":/core-features/authentication#capabilities-explained which lists available resources and, for any given resource, a set of permitted operations. The wildcard resource '@*@' will match any regular channel name.

In order to grant permission to a user to access a "metachannel":#metachannels, however, the resource name(s) in the @capability@ must include the @[meta]@ qualifier explicitly. If you are using an API Key, you can "set up capabilities in your dashboard":https://support.ably.io/solution/articles/3000073773-is-it-possible-to-restrict-which-channels-or-permissions-an-api-key-has.

If you are making use of "tokens":/core-features/authentication#token-authentication, you specify it within the token. The following are examples of capabilities that will validly permit access to a metachannel with tokens:

minimize. See an example of a capability allowing subscription to all metachannels
  ```[json]
  {"[meta]*":["subscribe"]}
  ```

  The above will allow for the key to @subscribe@ to any @meta@ channel. The wildcard @*@ indicates anything can follow the @[meta]@ claim, so an example of a valid channel would be @[meta]log@. However, this capability will not allow for any other actions to be performed on the metachannels, nor will it allow the key to do anything with any non-metachannels.

minimize. See an example of a capability allowing all permissible actions on all metachannels and all regular channels
  ```[json]
  {
    "[meta]*":["*"],
    "*":["*"]
  }
  ```

  The above permission provides two capabilities; the ability to perform any action on any metachannel (such as @[meta]log@) with @"[meta]*":["*"]@, and the ability to perform any action on any channel (such as @another:channel@) with @"*":["*"]@. However, you are *never* able to publish or be present in a metachannel, thus this permission in effect would result in an actual permission excluding publish and presence capabilities in @[meta]@ channels due to the "intersecting capabilities":/core-features/authentication#capabilities-explained-intersection.

If @[meta]@ is not specified in the permissions, you will be unable to access the metachannels however. An example of this would be the following:

minimize. See an example of a capability which is unable to use metachannels
  ```[json]
  {
    "*":["*"]
  }
  ```

  Although the above provide all capabilities in all regular channel, without a @[meta]@ permission being explicitly specified, you will be unable to perform any actions on a @[meta]@ channel.

h2(#subscribing-to-metadata-events). Subscribing to realtime events via the Channel Metadata API

Both the "channel lifecycle":#lifecycle-events and the "occupancy":#occupancy events are published onto a special channel referred to as a "metachannel":#metachannels bearing the name @[meta]channel.lifecycle@, that can be subscribed to with our "realtime libraries":/realtime. This is often used in conjunction with the "Ably Reactor":/reactor, which allows you to send this data to your "serverless endpoints":/general/functions, "queues":/general/queues, and "streams":/general/firehose.

h3(#lifecycle-events). Lifecycle Events

The following events arise as messages on the @[meta]channel.lifecycle@ channel. In all cases, the @data@ member of the message is a "ChannelDetails":#channel-details instance.

- channel.opened := indicates that the channel has been activated globally; that is, it has become active in at least one region, having previously been inactive. The included ChannelDetails.status includes "occupancy":#occupancy globally
- channel.closed := indicates that the channel has been deactivated globally
- channel.region.active := indicates that the channel has been activated in a specific region. The included @ChannelDetails.status@ includes "occupancy":#occupancy in that region
- channel.region.inactive := indicates that the channel has been deactivated in a specific region. The included @ChannelDetails.status@ includes "occupancy":#occupancy in that region
- channel.occupancy := indicates a change in global "occupancy":#occupancy on the channel. Not all "occupancy":#occupancy changes are sent; there is a minimum interval on a per-channel basis, so if the "occupancy":#occupancy is changing continuously, then only periodic snapshots of occupancy are sent. Further roll-up of events may occur depending on the capacity of the lifecycle channel. Any "occupancy":#occupancy changes in which any of the "occupancy":#occupancy categories changes from 0 to a non-zero count, or vice versa, are always included. This feature is only available to our "enterprise customers":https://www.ably.io/pricing/enterprise.

h3(#occupancy-events). channel.occupancy lifecycle events

When "channel.occupancy events are enabled":https://support.ably.io/support/solutions/articles/3000088326-how-can-i-enable-channel-lifecycles for your app, you can subscribe to channel "occupancy":#occupancy events by attaching to the channel @[meta]channel.lifecycle@ using a realtime connection. However, please bear in mind that "realtime connections and channels have rate limits":https://support.ably.io/solution/articles/3000053845-do-you-have-any-connection-message-rate-or-other-limits-on-accounts based on your package size. If the rate of channel lifecycle events exceeds this, a realtime connection is not going to be a reliable way to consume these events as you may get disconnected or lifecycle events may be discarded.

If you wish to stream this data beyond the limit of a single subscriber connection, you can make use of "Ably Reactor":/reactor with a "Reactor Rule":https://support.ably.io/solution/articles/3000074406-how-to-set-up-a-reactor-rule. This allows you to react to lifecycle events and trigger "serverless functions":/general/functions, "deliver messages to queues":/general/queues, or "stream data to third party services":/general/firehose for realtime processing.

h3(#reactor). Reactor rules

You can associate "Reactor rules":https://www.ably.io/reactor with metachannels in the same way as for regular channels; configure these using the "Message":/realtime/messages source and use a @channelFilter@ of, for example, @^\[meta\]log@. Normally the @channelFilter@ regex will only match normal, non-meta channels; however, a regex of the form @^\[qualifier\]pattern@ is special-cased to match channels with that qualifier. The @pattern@ is a regex as normal.

If you want webhooks for channel lifecycle events, creating a "channel lifecycle webhook":/general/webhooks#channel-lifecycle is an easy alternative to creating a message rule for the @[meta]channel.lifecycle@ metachannel; such webhooks will have simpler POST bodies as the lifecycle events won't be wrapped in "@Message@":/realtime/types#message objects.

h2(#use-cases). Use cases

Having access to channel metadata can provide numerous benefits. In a scenario where the number of subscribers of a channel goes well beyond a hundred, usage of other options such as "presence":/core-features/presence becomes less effective leading to an unexpected n-squared problem if all of the clients are subscribed to presence. You could instead make use of our "channel metadata":#metachannels to check the number of active subscribers.

Equally, you may want to publish your data only if there is a subscriber for that data. The "channel lifecycle events":#lifecycle-events can notify you when a channel is opened, becomes active, or is no longer active thus giving your publisher clients an opportunity to know when the last subscriber leaves the channel.

If you need to be able to query channel metadata at any point, you can make use of the "Channel Status API":/rest/channel-status#metadata-rest to inspect the state of individual channels, or "enumerate":/rest/channel-status#enumeration-rest all active channels in an app.

h2(#tutorials). Tutorials

If you wish to see an example of how to use channel metadata API, you can check out our "Channel Lifecycle Events":/tutorials/channel-lifecycle-events tutorial, "Channel Occupancy Events":/tutorials/channel-occupancy-events tutorial, or the "Channel Enumeration":/tutorials/channel-enumeration-rest tutorial.

h1. Channel Metadata API Reference

inline-toc.
  Types:
    - ChannelDetails#channel-details
    - ChannelStatus#channel-status
    - Occupancy#occupancy

h2(#types). Types

The payload of metadata events for channels is the "@ChannelDetails@":#channel-details type which contains the @channelId@ and other static information about the channel, plus a @status@ containing a "@ChannelStatus@":#channel-status instance which contains information about the current state of the channel.

<%= partial partial_version('types/_channel_details') %>
