---
title: API keys
meta_description: “Manage Ably API keys by creating, updating, setting restrictions, and exploring integration options.”
meta_keywords: "API keys, Ably, create key, update key, key restrictions, integration, webhooks, authentication"
---

The API keys tab lists all API keys associated with your account and provides information on each key's capabilities and restrictions. You can "create a new API key":#create and manage an existing one.

h2(#create). Create a new API key

The following steps create a new API Key:

* Click  *Create a new API key*.
** Assign a friendly name.
** Give the new API key a descriptive name (e.g. chat app key) so it is easy to identify later.

To manage an API key: set "capabilities":/auth/capabilities, define resource restrictions, use revocable tokens for security, and adjust key settings as needed.

h3. Capabilities

"Capabilities":/auth/capabilities provide permissions required for managing message flow, user presence, notifications, channel information, and access controls, these depend on what you require the API key to have access to:

|_. Capability |_. Description |
| *Publish* | Allow clients to publish messages to channels. |
| *Subscribe* | Allow clients to receive messages and presence state changes. |
| *History* | Allow clients to retrieve message and presence history. |
| *Presence* | Allow clients to register presence on a channel. |
| *Channel metadata* | Allow clients to query channel metadata. |
| *Push admin and push-subscribe* | Allow clients to manage and subscribe to push notifications. |
| *Statistics* | Allow clients to query usage statistics. |
| *Privileged headers* | Allow clients to set privileged headers, such as to skip channel rules. |

h3. Set resource restrictions

Set resource restrictions to control access to channels and queues, ranging from unrestricted access to specific, rule-based permissions:

|_. Restriction |_. Description |
| *None* | No restrictions; access any channel or queue. |
| *Only channels* | Access any channel but not queues. |
| *Only queues* | Access any queue but not channels. |
| *Selected channels and queues* | Specify explicit rules for access. |

h3. Revocable tokens

"Revocable tokens":/auth/revocation#revocable-tokens enhance security by allowing shorter token lifetimes and the ability to revoke tokens issued via the API key.

|_. Option |_. Description |
| *Revocable tokens* | Implement security measures by setting shorter token lifetimes and enabling the ability to revoke tokens issued by the API key. |

h3. Change your API key settings

Click *Settings* on the required API key to change its settings. The same settings apply as when creating a new API key.
