---
title: Messages
meta_description: "Realtime Client Library SDK API reference section for the message object."
meta_keywords: "Ably, Ably realtime, API Reference, Realtime SDK, message, messages"
section: api
index: 10
languages:
  - javascript
  - nodejs
  - ruby
  - java
  - swift
  - objc
  - csharp
  - flutter
jump_to:
  Message properties:
    - name#name
    - data#data
    - id#id
    - clientId#client-id
    - connectionId#connection-id
    - timestamp#timestamp
    - encoding#encoding
  Message methods:
    - fromEncoded#message-from-encoded
    - fromEncodedArray#message-from-encoded-array
redirect_from:
  - /api/versions/v1.1/realtime-sdk/messages
  - /api/versions/v1.0/realtime-sdk/messages
  - /api/versions/v0.8/realtime-sdk/messages
---

inline-toc.
  Properties:
    - name#name
    - data#data
    - extras#extras
    - id#id
    - clientId#client-id
    - connectionId#connection-id
    - timestamp#timestamp
    - encoding#encoding
  Methods:
    - fromEncoded#message-from-encoded
    - fromEncodedArray#message-from-encoded-array

blang[javascript,nodejs].

  <aside data-type='note'>
  <p>This API reference is for version 1.2 of the JavaScript SDK. Version 2.0 references are "available in TypeDoc.":https://ably.com/docs/sdk/js/v2.0/</p>
  </aside>

h2(#properties).
  default: Properties
  java:    Members
  ruby:    Attributes
  python:  Attributes

A @Message@ represents an individual message that is sent to or received from Ably.

h6(#name).
  default: name
  csharp: Name

The event name, if provided. <br>__Type: @String@__

h6(#data).
  default: data
  csharp: Data

The message payload, if provided.<br>__Type: <span lang="default">@String@, @StringBuffer@, @JSON Object@</span><span lang="java">@String@, @ByteArray@, @JSONObject@, @JSONArray@</span><span lang="csharp">@String@, @byte[]@, @plain C# object that can be serialized to JSON@</span><span lang="ruby">@String@, @Binary@ (ASCII-8BIT String), @Hash@, @Array@</span><span lang="python">@String@, @Bytearray@, @Dict@, @List@</span><span lang="php">@String@, @Binary String@, @Associative Array@, @Array@</span><span lang="objc">@NSString *@, @NSData *@, @NSDictionary *@, @NSArray *@</span><span lang="swift">@String@, @NSData@, @Dictionary@, @Array@</span><span lang="flutter">@String@, @Map@, @List@</span>__

h6(#extras).
  default: extras
  csharp: Extras

Metadata and/or ancillary payloads, if provided. The only currently valid payloads for extras are the "@push@":/general/push/publish#channel-broadcast-example, "@ref@":/channels/messages#interactions and "@privileged@":/general/webhooks#skipping objects.<br>__Type: <span lang="java">@JSONObject@, @JSONArray@</span><span lang="csharp">plain C# object that can be converted to JSON</span><span lang="jsall">@JSON Object@</span><span lang="ruby">@Hash@, @Array@</span><span lang="python">@Dict@, @List@</span><span lang="swift">@Dictionary@, @Array@</span><span lang="objc">@NSDictionary *@, @NSArray *@</span><span lang="php">@Associative Array@, @Array@</span>__

h6(#id).
  default: id
  csharp: Id

A Unique ID assigned by Ably to this message.<br>__Type: @String@__

h6(#client-id).
  default: clientId
  csharp: ClientId
  ruby: client_id
  python: client_id

The client ID of the publisher of this message.<br>__Type: @String@__

h6(#connection-id).
  default: connectionId
  csharp: ConnectionId
  ruby: connection_id
  python: connection_id

The connection ID of the publisher of this message.<br>__Type: @String@__

h6(#timestamp).
  default: timestamp
  csharp: Timestamp

Timestamp when the message was received by the Ably, as <span lang="default">milliseconds since the epoch</span><span lang="ruby">a @Time@ object</span><br>.__Type: <span lang="default">@Integer@</span><span lang="java">@Long Integer@</span><span lang="csharp">@DateTimeOffset@</span><span lang="ruby">@Time@</span><span lang="objc,swift">@NSDate@</span>__

h6(#encoding).
  default: encoding
  csharp: Encoding

This will typically be empty as all messages received from Ably are automatically decoded client-side using this value. However, if the message encoding cannot be processed, this attribute will contain the remaining transformations not applied to the @data@ payload.<br>__Type: @String@__

h2(methods).
  default: Message methods

h6(#message-from-encoded).
  default: Message.fromEncoded

bq(definition).
  default: Message.fromEncoded(Object encodedMsg, ChannelOptions channelOptions?) -> Message

A static factory method to create a "@Message@":/api/realtime-sdk/types#message from a deserialized @Message@-like object encoded using Ably's wire protocol.

h4. Parameters

- encodedMsg := a @Message@-like deserialized object.<br>__Type: @Object@__
- channelOptions := an optional "@ChannelOptions@":/api/realtime-sdk/types#channel-options. If you have an encrypted channel, use this to allow the library can decrypt the data.<br>__Type: @Object@__

h4. Returns

A "@Message@":/api/realtime-sdk/types#message object

h6(#message-from-encoded-array).
  default: Message.fromEncodedArray

bq(definition).
  default: Message.fromEncodedArray(Object[] encodedMsgs, ChannelOptions channelOptions?) -> Message[]

A static factory method to create an array of "@Messages@":/api/realtime-sdk/types#message from an array of deserialized @Message@-like object encoded using Ably's wire protocol.

h4. Parameters

- encodedMsgs := an array of @Message@-like deserialized objects.<br>__Type: @Array@__
- channelOptions := an optional "@ChannelOptions@":/api/realtime-sdk/types#channel-options. If you have an encrypted channel, use this to allow the library can decrypt the data.<br>__Type: @Object@__

h4. Returns

An @Array@ of "@Message@":/api/realtime-sdk/types#message objects
