---
title: Statistics
meta_description: "Realtime Client Library SDK API reference section for the stats object."
meta_keywords: "Ably, Ably realtime, API Reference, Realtime SDK, stats, statistics"
section: api
index: 50
languages:
  - javascript
  - nodejs
  - ruby
  - java
  - swift
  - objc
  - csharp
jump_to:
  API reference:
    - stats#stats
  Types:
    - Related Types#related-types
redirect_from:
  - /api/versions/v1.1/realtime-sdk/statistics
  - /api/versions/v1.0/realtime-sdk/statistics
  - /api/versions/v0.8/realtime-sdk/statistics
---

h6(#stats). stats

bq(definition).
  jsall:   stats(Object options, callback("ErrorInfo":/api/realtime-sdk/types#error-info err, "PaginatedResult":/api/realtime-sdk/types#paginated-result<"Stats":/api/realtime-sdk/types#stats> results))
  ruby:    "Deferrable":/api/realtime-sdk/types#deferrable stats(Hash options) -> yields "PaginatedResult":/api/realtime-sdk/types#paginated-result<"Stats":/api/realtime-sdk/types#stats>
  java:    "PaginatedResult":/api/realtime-sdk/types#paginated-result<"Stats":/api/realtime-sdk/types#stats-type> stats("Param":#param[] options)
  swift,objc: stats(query: ARTStatsQuery?, callback: ("ARTPaginatedResult":/api/realtime-sdk/types#paginated-result<"ARTStats":/api/realtime-sdk/types#stats>?, ARTErrorInfo?) -> Void) throws
  csharp:  Task<"PaginatedResult":/api/realtime-sdk/types#paginated-result<"Stats":/api/realtime-sdk/types#status>> StatsAsync("StatsRequestParams":#statsdatarequest query)

This call queries the "REST @/stats@ API":/api/rest-sdk#stats-type and retrieves your application's usage statistics. A "PaginatedResult":/api/realtime-sdk/types#paginated-result is returned, containing an array of "Stats":/api/realtime-sdk/types#stats-type for the first page of results. "PaginatedResult":/api/realtime-sdk/types#paginated-result objects are iterable providing a means to page through historical statistics. "See an example set of raw stats returned via the REST API":/metadata-stats/stats#metrics.

<%= partial partial_version('realtime/_stats') %>

h2(#related-types). Related types

h3(#stats-type).
  default: Stats object
  objc,swift: ARTStats
  java:    io.ably.lib.types.Stats
  ruby:    Ably::Models::Stats
  csharp:  IO.Ably.Stats

<%= partial partial_version('types/_stats') %>

h3(#stats-request-params).
  csharp: IO.Ably.StatsRequestParams

blang[csharp].
  <%= partial partial_version('types/_history_request_params'), indent: 2, skip_first_indent: true %>

h3(#stats-granularity).
  objc,swift: ARTStatsGranularity
  csharp: StatsIntervalGranularity

<%= partial partial_version('types/_stats_granularity') %>

h3(#param).
  java:    io.ably.lib.types.Param

blang[java].
  <%= partial partial_version('types/_param'), indent: 2, skip_first_indent: true %>
