h4. Parameters

- <span lang="default">options</span><span lang="objc,swift">query</span> := <span lang="default">an optional object</span><span lang="python">optional keyword arguments</span><span lang="ruby">an optional Hash</span><span lang="php">an optional Associative Array</span><span lang="objc,swift">an optional @ARTStatsQuery@</span><span lang="java">an optional "@Param@":#param[] array</span> containing the query parameters

- <div lang="jsall">callback</div> := is a function of the form: @function(err, result)@
- <div lang="swift,objc">callback</div> := called with a "ARTPaginatedResult":#paginated-result<"ARTStats":/rest/types#stats> object or an error

h4. <span lang="default">@options@ parameters</span><span lang="objc,swift">@ARTStatsQuery@ properties</span>

The following options, as defined in the "REST @/stats@ API":/rest-api#stats endpoint, are permitted:

- <span lang="ruby">:</span>start := _beginning of time_ earliest <span lang="ruby">@Time@ or </span>time in milliseconds since the epoch for any stats retrieved<br>__Type: <span lang="default">@Integer@</span><span lang="java">@Long Integer@</span><span lang="ruby">@Time@</span><span lang="objc,swift">@NSDate@</span>__
- <span lang="ruby">:</span>end := _current time_ latest <span lang="ruby">@Time@ or </span>time in milliseconds since the epoch for any stats retrieved<br>__Type: <span lang="default">@Integer@</span><span lang="java">@Long Integer@</span><span lang="ruby">@Time@</span><span lang="objc,swift">@NSDate@</span>__
- <span lang="ruby">:</span>direction := _backwards_ <span lang="ruby">@:@</span>@forwards@ or <span lang="ruby">@:@</span>@backwards@<br>__Type: <span lang="default">String</span><span lang="ruby">Symbol</span>__
- <span lang="ruby">:</span>limit := _100_ maximum number of messages to retrieve up to 1,000<br>__Type: @Integer@__
- <span lang="ruby">:</span>unit := _minute_ <span lang="ruby">@:@</span>@minute@, <span lang="ruby">@:@</span>@hour@, <span lang="ruby">@:@</span>@day@ or <span lang="ruby">@:@</span>@month@. Based on the unit selected, the given start or end times are rounded down to the start of the relevant interval depending on the unit granularity of the query<br>__Type: <span lang="default">@String@</span><span lang="objc,swift">"@ARTStatsGranularity@":#stats-granularity</span><span lang="ruby">@Symbol@</span>__

blang[jsall,swift,objc].
  h4. Callback result

  On success, @result@ contains a "@PaginatedResult@":#paginated-result encapsulating an array of "@Stats@":/rest/types#stats objects corresponding to the current page of results. "@PaginatedResult@":#paginated-result supports pagination using "@next@":#paginated-result and "@first@":#paginated-result methods.

  On failure to retrieve stats, @err@ contains an "@ErrorInfo@":#error-info object with an error response as defined in the "Ably REST API":/rest-api#common documentation.

blang[java,ruby,php].
  h4. Returns

  On success, the returned "@PaginatedResult@":#paginated-result encapsulates an array of "@Stats@":/rest/types#stats objects corresponding to the current page of results. "@PaginatedResult@":#paginated-result supports pagination using "@next@":#paginated-result and "@first@":#paginated-result methods.

  Failure to retrieve the stats will raise an "@AblyException@":/rest/types#ably-exception
