h4. Parameters

- <span lang="default">options</span><span lang="objc,swift,csharp">query</span><span lang="jsall">params</span> := an optional <span lang="default">object</span><span lang="ruby">Hash</span><span lang="objc,swift">@ARTStatsQuery@</span><span lang="csharp">@StatsRequestParams@</span><span lang="java">"@Param@[]":#param array</span><span lang="default"> containing the query parameters</span><span lang="jsall"> set of parameters used to specify which statistics are retrieved. If not specified the default parameters will be used</span>

- <div lang="ruby">&block</div> := yields a @PaginatedResult<Stats>@ object
- <div lang="swift,objc">callback</div> := called with a "ARTPaginatedResult":#paginated-result<"ARTStats":/docs/api/rest-sdk/types#stats> object or an error

h4. <span lang="default">@options@ parameters</span><span lang="objc,swift">@ARTStatsQuery@ properties</span><span lang="csharp">@StatsRequestParams@ properties</span><span lang="jsall">@params@ properties</span>

The following options, as defined in the "REST @/stats@ API":/docs/api/rest-api#stats endpoint, are permitted:

- <span lang="default">start</span><span lang="ruby">:start</span><span lang="csharp">Start</span> := _beginning of time_ earliest <span lang="csharp">@DateTimeOffset@ or </span><span lang="ruby">@Time@ or </span>time in milliseconds since the epoch for any stats retrieved<br>__Type: <span lang="default">@Long@</span><span lang="ruby">@Int@ or @Time@</span><span lang="csharp">@DateTimeOffset@</span><span lang="jsall">@Number@</span>__
- <span lang="default">end</span><span lang="ruby">:end</span><span lang="csharp">End</span> := _current time_ latest <span lang="csharp">@DateTimeOffset@ or </span><span lang="ruby">@Time@ or </span>time in milliseconds since the epoch for any stats retrieved<br>__Type: <span lang="default">@Long@</span><span lang="ruby">@Int@ or @Time@</span><span lang="csharp">@DateTimeOffset@</span><span lang="jsall">@Number@</span>__
- <span lang="default">direction</span><span lang="ruby">:direction</span><span lang="csharp">Direction</span> := _backwards_ <span lang="ruby">@:forwards@ or @:backwards@</span><span lang="default">@forwards@ or @backwards@</span><br>__Type: <span lang="default">@String@</span><span lang="ruby">@Symbol@</span><span lang="csharp">@Direction@ enum</span>__
- <span lang="default">limit</span><span lang="ruby">:limit</span><span lang="csharp">Limit</span> := _100_ maximum number of stats to retrieve up to 1,000<br>__Type: <span lang="default">@Integer@</span><span lang="jsall">@Number@</span>__
- <span lang="default">unit</span><span lang="ruby">:unit</span><span lang="csharp">Unit</span> := _minute_ <span lang="ruby">@:minute@, @:hour@, @:day@ or @:month@.</span><span lang="default">@minute@, @hour@, @day@ or @month@.</span> Based on the unit selected, the given start or end times are rounded down to the start of the relevant interval depending on the unit granularity of the query<br>__Type: <span lang="default">@String@</span><span lang="jsall">@StatsIntervalGranularity@</span><span lang="objc,swift">"@ARTStatsGranularity@":#stats-granularity</span><span lang="ruby">@Symbol@</span><span lang="csharp">@StatsIntervalGranularity@ enum</span>__

blang[jsall].
  h4. Returns

  Returns a promise. On success, the promise is fulfilled with a "@PaginatedResult@":/api/realtime-sdk/types#paginated-result object containing an array of "@Stats@":/api/realtime-sdk/types#stats objects. On failure, the promise is rejected with an "@ErrorInfo@":/api/realtime-sdk/types#error-info object.

blang[objc,swift].
  h4. Callback result

  On success, @result@ contains a "@PaginatedResult@":#paginated-result encapsulating an array of "@Stats@":/docs/api/realtime-sdk/types#stats objects corresponding to the current page of results. "@PaginatedResult@":#paginated-result supports pagination using "@next@":#paginated-result and "@first@":#paginated-result methods.

  On failure to retrieve stats, @err@ contains an "@ErrorInfo@":#error-info object with an error response as defined in the "Ably REST API":/docs/api/rest-api#common documentation.

blang[java].
  h4. Returns

  On success, the returned "@PaginatedResult@":#paginated-result encapsulates an array of "@Stats@":/docs/api/realtime-sdk/types#stats objects corresponding to the current page of results. "@PaginatedResult@":#paginated-result supports pagination using "@next@":#paginated-result and "@first@":#paginated-result methods.

  Failure to retrieve the stats will raise an "@AblyException@":/docs/api/realtime-sdk/types#ably-exception

blang[csharp].
  h4. Returns

  Returns a @Task<PaginatedResult>@ which needs to be awaited.

  On success, the returned "@PaginatedResult@":#paginated-result encapsulates an array of "@Stats@":/docs/api/realtime-sdk/types#stats objects corresponding to the current page of results. "@PaginatedResult@":#paginated-result supports pagination using "@NextAsync@":#paginated-result and "@FirstAsync@":#paginated-result methods.

  Failure to retrieve the stats will raise an "@AblyException@":/docs/api/realtime-sdk/types#ably-exception

blang[ruby].
  h4. Returns

  A "@Deferrable@":/docs/api/realtime-sdk/types#deferrable object is returned from the stats method.

  On success, the registered success callbacks for the "@Deferrable@":/docs/api/realtime-sdk/types#deferrable and any block provided to the method yields a "PaginatedResult":#paginated-result that encapsulates an array of "@Stats@":/docs/api/realtime-sdk/types#stats objects corresponding to the current page of results. "@PaginatedResult@":#paginated-result supports pagination using "@next@":#paginated-result and "@first@":#paginated-result methods.

  Failure to retrieve the stats will trigger the errback callbacks of the "@Deferrable@":/docs/api/realtime-sdk/types#deferrable with an "@ErrorInfo@":#error-info object containing an error response as defined in the "Ably REST API":/docs/api/rest-api#common documentation.
