---
title: Channel Metadata
section: api
index: 25
jump_to:
  Channel API Types:
    - ChannelDetails#channel-details
    - ChannelStatus#channel-status
    - Occupancy#occupancy
---

inline-toc.
  Types:
    - ChannelDetails#channel-details
    - ChannelStatus#channel-status
    - Occupancy#occupancy

h2(#types). Types

The payload of metadata events for channels is the "ChannelDetails":#channel-details type which contains the @channelId@ and other static information about the channel, plus a @status@ containing a "ChannelStatus":#channel-status instance which contains information about the current state of the channel.

h3(#channel-details). ChannelDetails

ChannelDetails is an object returned when requesting channel metadata. It contains information on the channel itself, along with the current state of the channel in the "ChannelStatus":#channel-status object.

- channelId := the required name of the channel including any qualifier, if any<br>__Type: @string@__
- region := in events relating to the activity of a channel in a specific region, this optionally identifies the region<br>__Type: @string@__
- isGlobalMaster := in events relating to the activity of a channel in a specific region, this optionally identifies whether or not that region is resonsible for global coordination of the channel<br>__Type: @string@__
- status := an optional "ChannelStatus":#channel-status instance<br>__Type: "ChannelStatus":#channel-status__

h3(#channel-status). ChannelDetails.ChannelStatus

ChannelStatus is contained within the above ChannelDetails object, and optionally contains the below "Occupancy":#occupancy object.

- isActive := a required boolean value indicating whether the channel that is the subject of the event is active. For events indicating regional activity of a channel this indicates activity in that region, not global activity<br>__Type: @boolean@__
- occupancy := an optional "Occupancy":#occupancy instance indicating the occupancy of the channel. For events indicating regional activity of a channel this indicates activity in that region, not global activity.<br>__Type: "Occupancy":#occupancy__

h3(#occupancy). ChannelDetails.ChannelStatus.Occupancy

Occupancy is optionally contained within the above "ChannelStatus":#channel-status object, and contains information on the occupants of the channel. This is usually contained within the *metrics* object, an optional dictionary of membership categories for a realtime channel and their counts. Membership categories include:

- publishers := the number of connections attached to the channel that are authorised to publish<br>__Type: @integer@__
- subscribers := the number of connections attached that are authorised to subscribe to messages<br>__Type: @integer@__
- presenceSubscribers := the number of connections that are authorised to subscribe to presence messages<br>__Type: @integer@__
- presenceConnections := the number of connections that are authorised to enter members into the presence channel<br>__Type: @integer@__
- presenceMembers := the number of members currently entered into the presence channel<br>__Type: @integer@__
