A @Message@ represents an individual message that is sent to or received from Ably.

h4.
  default: Properties
  java:    Members
  ruby:    Attributes
  python:  Attributes

- <span lang="default">name</span><span lang="csharp">Name</span> := Event name, if provided<br>__Type: @String@__

- <div lang="default">data</div> := The message payload, if provided<br>__Type: @String@, @StringBuffer@, @JSON Object@__
- <div lang="java">data</div> := The message payload, if provided<br>__Type: @String@, @ByteArray@, @JSONObject@, @JSONArray@__
- <div lang="csharp">Data</div> := The message payload, if provided<br>__Type: @String@, @byte[]@, plain C# object that can be serialized to Json__
- <div lang="ruby">data</div> := The message payload, if provided<br>__Type: @String@, @Binary@ (ASCII-8BIT String), @Hash@, @Array@__
- <div lang="python">data</div> := The message payload, if provided<br>__Type: @String@, @Bytearray@, @Dict@, @List@__
- <div lang="php">data</div> := The message payload, if provided<br>__Type: @String@, @Binary String@, @Associative Array@, @Array@__
- <div lang="objc">data</div> := The message payload, if provided<br>__Type: @NSString *@, @NSData *@, @NSDictionary *@, @NSArray *@__
- <div lang="swift">data</div> := The message payload, if provided<br>__Type: @String@, @NSData@, @Dictionary@, @Array@__

- <span lang="default">id</span><span lang="csharp">Id</span> := Unique ID assigned by Ably to this message<br>__Type: @String@__

- <span lang="default">clientId</span><span lang="ruby,python">client_id</span><span lang="csharp">ClientId</span> := The client ID of the publisher of this message<br>__Type: @String@__

- <span lang="default">connectionId</span><span lang="ruby,python">connection_id</span><span lang="csharp">ConnectionId</span> := The connection ID of the publisher of this message<br>__Type: @String@__

- <span lang="default">timestamp</span><span lang="csharp">Timestamp</span> := Timestamp when the message was received by the Ably, as <span lang="default">milliseconds since the epoch</span><span lang="ruby">a @Time@ object</span><br>__Type: <span lang="default">@Integer@</span><span lang="java">@Long Integer@</span><span lang="csharp">@DateTimeOffset@</span><span lang="ruby">@Time@</span><span lang="objc,swift">@NSDate@</span>__

- <span lang="default">encoding</span><span lang="csharp">Encoding</span> := This will typically be empty as all messages received from Ably are automatically decoded client-side using this value. However, if the message encoding cannot be processed, this attribute will contain the remaining transformations not applied to the @data@ payload<br>__Type: @String@__

h3.
  default: Message constructors

h4(#message-from-encoded).
  default: Message.fromEncoded

bq(definition).
  default: Message.fromEncoded(Object encodedMsg, ChannelOptions channelOptions?) -> Message

A static factory method to create a "@Message@":/realtime/types#message from a deserialized @Message@-like object encoded using Ably's wire protocol.

h4. Parameters

- encodedMsg := a @Message@-like deserialized object.<br>__Type: @Object@__
- channelOptions := an optional "@ChannelOptions@":/realtime/types#channel-options. If you have an encrypted channel, use this to allow the library can decrypt the data.<br>__Type: @Object@__

h4. Returns

A "@Message@":/realtime/types#message object

h4(#message-from-encoded-array).
  default: Message.fromEncodedArray

bq(definition).
  default: Message.fromEncodedArray(Object[] encodedMsgs, ChannelOptions channelOptions?) -> Message[]

A static factory method to create an array of "@Messages@":/realtime/types#message from an array of deserialized @Message@-like object encoded using Ably's wire protocol.

h4. Parameters

- encodedMsgs := an array of @Message@-like deserialized objects.<br>__Type: @Array@__
- channelOptions := an optional "@ChannelOptions@":/realtime/types#channel-options. If you have an encrypted channel, use this to allow the library can decrypt the data.<br>__Type: @Object@__

h4. Returns

An @Array@ of "@Message@":/realtime/types#message objects

