@TokenRequest@ is a type containing parameters for an Ably @TokenRequest@. "Ably Tokens":/core-features/authentication#ably-tokens are requested using <span lang="default">"Auth#requestToken":/rest/authentication#request-token</span><span lang="ruby">"Auth#request_token":/rest/authentication#request-token</span>

h4.
  default: Properties
  java:    Members
  ruby:    Attributes

- <span lang="default">keyName</span><span lang="ruby,python">key_name</span><span lang="csharp">KeyName</span> := The key name of the key against which this request is made. The key name is public, whereas the key secret is private<br>__Type: @String@__
- <span lang="default">ttl</span><span lang="csharp">Ttl</span> := Requested time to live for the "Ably Token":/core-features/authentication#ably-tokens <span lang="default">in milliseconds</span><span lang="ruby">in seconds</span><span lang="csharp">as a @TimeSpan@</span>. If the Ably @TokenRequest@ is successful, the TTL of the returned "Ably Token":/core-features/authentication#ably-tokens will be less than or equal to this value depending on application settings and the attributes of the issuing key.<br><span lang="default">__Type: <span lang="default">@Integer@</span><span lang="csharp">@TimeSpan@</span><span lang="swift,objc">@NSTimeInterval@</span>__
- <span lang="default">timestamp</span><span lang="csharp">Timestamp</span> := The timestamp of this request<span lang="default"> in milliseconds</span><span lang="ruby,csharp"></span><br>__Type: <span lang="default">@Integer@</span><span lang="java">@Long Integer@</span><span lang="ruby">@Time@</span><span lang="csharp">@DateTimeOffset@</span><span lang="swift,obj">@NSDate@</span>__
- <span lang="default">capability</span><span lang="csharp">Capability</span> :=  Capability of the requested "Ably Token":/core-features/authentication#ably-tokens. If the Ably @TokenRequest@ is successful, the capability of the returned "Ably Token":/core-features/authentication#ably-tokens will be the intersection of this capability with the capability of the issuing key. The capability is a JSON stringified canonicalized representation of the resource paths and associated operations. "Read more about authentication and capabilities":/realtime/authentication<br>__Type: @String@__
- <span lang="default">clientId</span><span lang="ruby,python">client_id</span><span lang="csharp">ClientId</span> := The client ID to associate with the requested "Ably Token":/core-features/authentication#ably-tokens. When provided, the "Ably Token":/core-features/authentication#ably-tokens may only be used to perform operations on behalf of that client ID<br>__Type: @String@__
- <span lang="default">nonce</span><span lang="csharp">Nonce</span> := An opaque nonce string of at least 16 characters<br>__Type: @String@__
- <span lang="default">mac</span><span lang="csharp">Mac</span> := The Message Authentication Code for this request<br>__Type: @String@__

h3.
  default: TokenRequest constructors

h4(#token-request-from-json).
  default: TokenRequest.fromJson
  ruby: TokenRequest.from_json

bq(definition).
  default: TokenRequest.fromJson(String json) -> TokenRequest
  ruby: TokenRequest.from_json(String json) -> TokenRequest

bq(definition).
  default: TokenRequest.fromJson(Object json) -> TokenRequest
  ruby: TokenRequest.from_json(Object json) -> TokenRequest

A static factory method to create a "@TokenRequest@":/realtime/types#token-request from a deserialized @TokenRequest@-like object or a JSON stringified @TokenRequest@. This method is provided to minimize bugs as a result of differing types by platform for fields such as @timestamp@ or @ttl@. For example, in Ruby @ttl@ in the @TokenRequest@ object is exposed in seconds as that is idiomatic for the language, yet when serialized to JSON using @to_json@ it is automatically converted to the Ably standard which is milliseconds. By using the @fromJson@ method when constructing a @TokenRequest@, Ably ensures that all fields are consistently serialized and deserialized across platforms.

h4. Parameters

- json := a @TokenRequest@-like deserialized object or JSON stringified @TokenRequest@.<br>__Type: @Object, String@__

h4. Returns

A "@TokenRequest@":/realtime/types#token-request object
