h3(#from-encoded).
  default: PresenceMessage.fromEncoded

bq(definition).
  default: PresenceMessage.fromEncoded(Object encodedPresMsg, ChannelOptions channelOptions?) -> PresenceMessage

A static factory method to create a "@PresenceMessage@":/realtime/types#presence-message from a deserialized @PresenceMessage@-like object encoded using Ably's wire protocol.

h4. Parameters

- encodedPresMsg := a @PresenceMessage@-like deserialized object.<br>__Type: @Object@__
- channelOptions := an optional "@ChannelOptions@":/realtime/types#channel-options. If you have an encrypted channel, use this to allow the library can decrypt the data.<br>__Type: @Object@__

h4. Returns

A "@PresenceMessage@":/realtime/types#presence-message object

h3(#from-encoded-array).
  default: PresenceMessage.fromEncodedArray

bq(definition).
  default: PresenceMessage.fromEncodedArray(Object[] encodedPresMsgs, ChannelOptions channelOptions?) -> PresenceMessage[]

A static factory method to create an array of "@PresenceMessages@":/realtime/types#presence-message from an array of deserialized @PresenceMessage@-like object encoded using Ably's wire protocol.

h4. Parameters

- encodedPresMsgs := an array of @PresenceMessage@-like deserialized objects.<br>__Type: @Array@__
- channelOptions := an optional "@ChannelOptions@":/realtime/types#channel-options. If you have an encrypted channel, use this to allow the library can decrypt the data.<br>__Type: @Object@__

h4. Returns

An @Array@ of "@PresenceMessage@":/realtime/types#presence-message objects
